AKAI S1000 Series Software Version 2.0 Manual

              for S1000, S1000HD, S1000PB
Version 2.0 89/11   Table of Contents - iii
                                                                        Introduction


1 Introduction
    We at AKAI, and in particular the S1000 series development team, would like to thank you for
buying a model of the Akai S1000 series, and hope that you will remain an AKAI player and user
for a long time. As each unit is thoroughly tested and inspected before it leaves our factory, we are
confident that you will enjoy years of service from this instrument.
    Though we have taken great care in the manufacture of your AKAI sampler, any product
which uses this level of technology may require servicing occasionally. The warranty below
outlines your rights and responsibilities, and also mentions certain limitations and exclusions.
Please read this warranty section carefully.
  About this Manual
      This manual covers operations under software Version 2.0 for the whole of the S1000 range
      (S1000, S1000HD and S1000PB). In this manual usually all models in the S1000 series will
      be referred to as "S1000". However, there are some functions and descriptions which apply
      only to particular models in the series. These parts of the manual are marked as being for
      these models, and you should take note accordingly.
      This manual has been arranged in an order which we hope will be useful in your initial
      experiments with the S1000, and then for future use afterwards, as you learn more functions.
      Since the bottom row of buttons under the display (SELECT PROG, EDIT SAMPLE, etc)
      correspond to logical operations within the S1000's software, the manual has been arranged
      for the most part in sections matching these buttons.
      There are two major exceptions to this rule: this first section, "Introduction", which is both
      an introduction to the features and terminology of the S1000, and a guide to the operation of
      SELECT PROG -- in other words, how to get your S1000 playing pre-recorded sample
      programs. Please take the trouble to read this section, as it explains basic terminology,
      operational concepts and shortcuts which you may not discover for yourself.
       The second section, "Sampler Functions", covers the sampling and sample editing processes
       (EDIT SAMPLE), as well as the program editing functions (EDIT PROG). This chapter has
       been written from the "bottom up", ie from the process of recording a sample, through
       editing a sample, to putting together a program.
       At the end of this manual there is an index. If you can't find what you want in the Table of
       Contents, try the index. Most major entries are cross-referenced in a number of ways, for
       instance, "Velocity crossfading" may also be looked up under "Crossfading, Velocity".
       Finally, this manual assumes that you have a basic knowledge of MIDI and synthesizer
       terminology (eg you know what is meant by an "ADSR envelope" or a "Program Change
       message"). If you don't, there are many excellent books on the market which will guide you
       into the world of MIDI instruments and synthesizers. Get hold of one of these and read it
       before going much further with your S1000 - things will make a lot more sense after you've
       done this.




 Version 20 89/11                                                                               Page 1
    Introduction


 WARRANTY
     AKAI Electric Co. Ltd warrants its products, when purchased from an authorized AKAI dealer, to be free from
     defects in materials and workmanship for a period of 12 (twelve) months from the date of purchase. Warranty
     service is effective and available to the original purchaser only, and only on completion and return of the AKAI
     Warranty Registration Card within 14 days of purchase.
     War: nary coverage is valid for factory-authorized updates to AKAI instruments and their software, when
     their installation is performed by an authorized AKAI Service Center, and a properly completed Warranty
     Registration has been returned to the factory.
     To obtain service under this warranty, the product must, on discovery of the defect, be properly packed and
     skipped to the nearest AKAI Service Center. The party requesting warranty service moat provide proof of original
     ownership sad date of purchase of the product.
     If the warranty is valid, AKAI will, without charge for parts or, labor, either repair or replace the defective
     part(a). Without a valid warranty, the entire coat of the repair (parts and labor) is the responsibility of
     the product's owner.
     AKAI warrants that it will make all necessary adjustments, repairs and replacements at no coat to the original
     owner within 12 (twelve) months of the purchase date if:
     1 The product fails to perform its specified functions due to failure of one or more of its components.
     2 The product fails to perform its specified functions due to defects in workmanship.
     3       The product has been maintained and operated by the owner in strict accordance with the written instructions
             for proper maintenance and use as specified in this Operator's Manual.
     Before purchase and use, owners should determine the suitability of the product for their intended use, and the
     owner assumes all risk and liability whatsoever in connection therewith. AKAI shall not be liable for any injury,
     loss or damage, direct or consequential, arising out of the use, or inability to use the product.
     The warranty provides only those benefits specified, and does not cover defects or repairs needed as a result of acts
     beyond the control of AICAI, including, but not limited to:
     1       Damage caused by abuse, accident or negligence. AKAI will not cover under warranty any original factory
             disk damaged or destroyed as a result of the owner's mishandling.
     2       Damage caused by any tampering, alteration or modification of the product: operating software, mechanical or
             electronic components.
     3       Damage caused by failure to maintain sad operate the product is strict accordance with the written instructions
             for proper maintenance sad use as specified in this Operator's Manual.
     4       Damage caused by repairs or attempted repairs by unauthorized persona.
     5       Damage caused by fire, smoke, falling objects, water or other liquids, or natural events such as rain, floods,
             earthquakes, lightning, tornadoes, storms, etc.
     6       Damage caused by operation on improper voltages.
     IMPORTANT NOTE: This warranty becomes void if the product or its software is electronically modified, altered
     or tampered with is any way.
     AKAI shall not be liable for coats involved is packing or preparing the product for shipping, with regard to time,
     labor or materials, shipping or freight coats, or time sad expenses involved in transporting the product to and from
     an AKAI Authorized Service Center or Authorized Dealer.
     AKAI will not cover under warranty an apparent malfunction that is determined to be user error, or the owner's
     inability to use the product.
     THE DURATION OF ANY OTHER WARRANTIES, WHETHER IMPLIED OR EXPRESS, INCLUDING BUT
     NOT LIMITED TO THE IMPLIED CONDITION OF MERCHANTABILITY, IS LIMITED TO THE
     DURATION OF THE EXPRESS WARRANTY HEREIN.
     ARAI hereby excludes incidental or consequential damages, including but not limited to:
         1    Loss of time
         2    Inconvenience
         3    Delay in performance of the Warranty
         4    The lose of use of the product
         5    Commercial lose
         6    Breach of any express or implied warranty, including the Implied Warranty of Merchantability, applicable to
              this product




Page 2                                                                                                     Version 20 89/11
                                                                       Introduction


 Copyright notice
      The AKAI S1000 is a computer-based instrument, and as such contains and uses software in
      ROMs and disks. This software, and all related documentation, including this Operator's
      Manual, contain proprietary information which is protected by copyright laws. All rights are
      reserved. No part of the software or its documentation may be copied, transferred or
      modified. You may copy the operating software and any samples, programs, etc contained
      on disks for your own personal use. All other copies of the software are in violation of
      copyright laws. You may not distribute copies of the software to others, or transfer the
      software to another computer by electronic means. You may not modify, adapt, translate,
      lease, distribute, resell for profit or create derivative works based on the software and its
      related documentation or any part thereof without prior written consent from AKAI Electric
      Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 3
    Introduction


 WARNING
     Power requirements for electrical equipment vary from area to area. Please ensure
     that your S1000 meets the power requirements in your area. If in doubt, consult a
     qualified electrician.
     120V @ 60Hz for USA and Canada
     220V @ 50Hz for Europe (excluding UK)
     240V @ 50Hz for UK and Australia
     Protecting yourself and the S1000
     • Never touch the plug with wet hands.
     • Always disconnect the S1000 from the power supply by pulling on the plug, not the cord.
     • Allow only a qualified professional engineer to repair or reassemble the S1000. Apart
         from voiding the warranty, unauthorized engineers might touch live internal parts and
         receive a serious electric shock.
     • Do not put, or allow anyone to put any object, especially metal objects, into the S1000.
         •   Use only a household AC power supply. Never use a DC power supply.
         •   If water or any other liquid is spilled into or onto the S1000, disconnect the power, and
             call your dealer.
         • Make sure that the unit is well-ventilated, and away from direct sunlight.
         • To avoid damage to internal circuitry, as well as the external finish, keep the S1000 away
           from sources of direct heat (stoves, radiators, etc).
         • Avoid using aerosol insecticides, etc near the S1000. They may damage the surface, and
           may ignite.
         • Do not use denaturated alcohol, thinner or similar chemicals to clean the S1000. They will
           damage the finish.
         • Make sure that the S1000 is always well-supported when in use (either in a
           specially-designed equipment rack, or a firm level surface).
         • When installing the S1000 in a 19" rack system, always allow lU of ventilated free space
           above it to allow for cooling. Make sure that the back of the rack is unobstructed to allow
           a clear airflow.
         UK customers
           Important safety notice - The flex supplied with this machine has three wires, as shown
           in the illustration.
             WARNING: THIS APPLIANCE MUST BE
             EARTHED
              IMPORTANT
             The wires in this mains lead are coloured in accordance with the following code:
             Green-and-yellow - earth
             Blue - neutral
             Brown - live




Page 4                                                                                     Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                              Introduction


         As the colours of the wires in the flex may
         not correspond to the colour markings in
         your plug, make sure that wires are
         connect in the following way. The
         green-and yellow wire should be
         connected to the terminal marked "E" or
         marked with the safety earth symbol ( );
         the blue wire is connected to the terminal
         marked "N", or coloured black. The
         brown wire should be connected to the
         terminal marked "L", or coloured red.
         Make sure all terminal screws are
         tightened and there are no loose strands of
         wire.


       FCC warning
           This equipment generates and uses radio frequency energy, and if not installed and
           used properly, that is, in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, may
           cause interference to radio and television reception. It has been type tested and found
           to comply with the limits for a Class B computing device in accordance with the
           specifications in Subpart J of Part 15 FCC Rules, which are designed to provide
           reasonable protection against such interference in a residential installation. However,
           there is no guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular installation. If this
           equipment does cause interference to radio or television reception, which can be
           determined by turning the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to try to
           correct the interference by one or more of the following measures:
            -          reorientate the receiving antenna
            -          relocate the equipment with respect to the receiver
            --         move the equipment away from the receiver
            -          plug the equipment into a different outlet, so that the equipment and
            receiver are on different branch circuits
            If necessary, the user should consult the dealer or an experienced radio/television
            technician for additional suggestions.
            The user may find the following booklet prepared by the Federal Communications
            Commission helpful:
                        "How to Identify and Resolve Radio-TV Interference Problems"
            This booklet is available from the U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC
            20402, Stock No. 004-000-0034504.


                           Avis pour les acheteurs canadiens du S1000/ HD / PB
            Le pr6sent appareil num6rique n'emet pas des bruits radioelectriques depassant les
            limites applicables aux appareils numeriques de la Class B prescrites dans le
            Reglement sur le brouillage radioelectrique edicte par le ministere des
            Communications du Canada




Version 2.089/11                                                                                  Page 5
    Introduction


                    FUR KUNDEN IN DER BUNDESREPUBLIK DEUTSCHLAND
         Bescheinigung von AKAI
         Hiermit wird bescheinigt, daB das Gerdt AKAI
                                               S1000 / HD / PB in
         tYbereinstimmung mit den Bestimmungen der
                                  Amtsblattverftigung 1046/1984
         funkentstbrt ist.
         Der Deutschen Bundespost wurde das Inverkehrbringen theses GerAtes ange
         zeigt and die Berichtignng zur Oberprdfung der Serie auf Einhaltung der
         Bestimmungen eingerliumt.
         AKAI ELECTRIC CO., LTD




Page 6                                                                       Version 20 89/11
                                                                             Introduction


 Features
     The AKAI S1000 is a high-quality digital sampler. With a sampling rate of 44.1kHz, and
     16-bit resolution, the S1000 is capable of recording and replaying samples literally of CD
     quality, and the basic unexpended unit has a total sample time of over 23 seconds (mono).
     Memory may be added in 2Mbyte boards to a total of 8Mbytes to give over 90 seconds of
     total sample time.
     There are three models in the AKAI S1000 series: the basic S1000, with a diskette drive, the
     51000HD, with an integral 40Mb hard disk, and the S1000PB, which has a diskette drive,
     but none of the sample recording or editing facilities of the other models. The S1000PB is
     especially useful for setups where more than 16-note polyphony is required (using a S1000
     and S1000PB), or as a playback-only sampler for live work. A 51000 may be used for
     recording and editing of samples, and they may then be transferred to a S1000PB using
     diskette or MIDI Sample Dump, and replayed. Diskette and MIDI data is, naturally,
     completely compatible between all models in the range, as well as with the S1000KB
     sampling keyboard.
      16-note polyphony allows complex passages to be played with the full sample time. The
      samples may be edited with full trimming facilities (down to 1 sampling period), looped at
      up to 8 loop points per sample (with tuning of the loop), spliced to other samples, filtered
      and sent through two independent ADSR envelope generators. Full velocity, positional and
      looping crossfading is possible. Basic synthesizer waveforms (sine, triangle, etc) are
      available on disk for synthesizer/sampler sounds.
      The S1000 is also capable of editing samples digitally - "stretching" or "squeezing" samples
      without changing the pitch in order to fit them into a specific time slot. Resampling can be
      done at any frequency (higher or lower than the original).
      The stereo facility is ideal for sampling portions of prerecorded program material (making it
      an ideal tool for "house", "hip-hop" etc productions), as well as for sampling ambient
      acoustic sounds.
      Naturally, a full MIDI implementation is built in - multi-timbral capabilities making the
      S1000 perfect for use with a sequencer such as the AKAI MPC-60 or ASQ-10.
       Special functions for remote operation of the AKAI ME-35T Audio/MIDI trigger unit (1 or
       2 can be controlled), together with a single-trigger monophonic mode make the S1000 into a
       real-time percussion tone generator.
       In the studio, eight separate outputs allow maximum flexibility in mixing and adding effects.
       However, stereo operation is possible from just two outputs, and a built-in stereo effects
       send/return loop can save channels and space in live work.
       The S1000 is capable of processing up to 200 samples, 100 programs, or a combination of
       up to 400 samples + programs + keygroups. The internal 3.5" floppy disk drive provides a
       quick easy method of storing and retrieving data (samples, programs and other settings).
      Hard disks may be used by the S1000 when using the optional IB-103 interface board
      (AKAI provide a 40Mbyte capacity drive which may be mounted internally), but any
      SCSI-compatible drive may be used up to a capacity of 512Mbytes. The hard disk may be
      divided into partitions and volumes, and individual volumes may be auto-




                                                                                              Page 7
Version 2.0 89/11
    Introduction


    matically loaded in response to MIDI Program Change commands. The SCSI interface may
    also be used for fast transmission of sample data to SCSI-equipped computers for editing, etc.
    The optional IB-104 digital interface board provides coaxial and optical digital links, for
    direct digital sampling at rates of up to 48kHz, and hard disk archive/restore to DAT for
    quick and easy storage of data.
    The industry-standard sampler prior to the introduction of the S1000 was the ALAI S900, and
    hundreds of sample disks were produced for this machine. You'll be pleased to know that the
    S1000 is capable of reading these samples and the associated programs from disk, converting
    them, and replaying them.




Page 8                                                                             Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                     Introduction


  Glossary
      Every new technology invents its own terms to describe new techniques. Digital music is no
      exception, unfortunately. However, a glossary such as this can help introduce you to the
      vocabulary and concepts involved. We assume you have a basic knowledge of MIDI, but if
      the S1000 is your first excursion into MIDI and sampling, we suggest you get hold of an
      introductory MIDI book, and read it before proceeding much further with your S1000.

       NOTE: This manual covers all models of the S1000 series - including the S1000PB
       (playback model). On the PB model, the CURSOR and DATA rotary knobs are replaced
       by two pairs of buttons (<= and => ), which correspond to turning the knobs by
       counterclockwise and clockwise respectively. One press of these buttons corresponds to
       turning the knobs by one click.
       For the sake of simplicity, this manual will always refer to turning the CURSOR or DATA
       knobs. If you are using a S1000PB, you should interpret this as pressing the appropriate
       button (CURSOR or DATA). Where other S1000PB-specific information is given, this
       will be clearly indicated.
      Button
         In this manual, the word "button" will generally be used to refer to a push-button switch
         on the front panel. This is to distinguish them from the keys on a musical piano-type
         keyboard. There are two major exceptions to this convention: the use of the terms
         "number keypad", and "soft key", which come from computing, and are so
         well-engrained in technical language that using the terms "number button pad" and "soft
         button" would be pointless.

       Crossfading
         On the S1000, crossfading is the term used to describe the setting of the relative volume of
         two samples which are played at the same time. For instance velocity crossfading is used to
         describe the relative balance between two samples played by the same key, when the key
         is played at different velocities. Positional crossfading refers to relative balance between
         samples in different keyspans (see Multisampling. Additionally, the S1000 allows loop
         crossfading - the ability to fade samples inside themselves to allow for smooth looping.

       Cursor
         On the S1000, the cursor is the highlighted (reverse) part of the display which is moved by
         the CURSOR knob (S1000PB - CURSOR buttons), and indicates the parameter which
         may be changed by the DATA knob (S1000PB - DATA buttons) and/or the number
         keypad.
       Field
          On the S1000, a field is the portion of a page containing a parameter. Only fields (ie those
          portions of a page which may be altered) will be highlighted by the cursor as the
          CURSOR knob is turned to go through a page.

       Key
         In this manual, the word "key" will be generally used to refer to a key on a piano-type
         keyboard to distinguish these from buttons on the front panel.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                              Page 9
    Introduction



     Keygroup
       The term for a collection of a number of parameters of up to four samples - their name,
       keyspan, filtering, envelopes, etc.

     Keyspan
       On the S1000, a keyspan is the range of the keyboard on which a sample can be played.

     LFO
       Low Frequency Oscillator - an oscillator which operates at too low a frequency to produce
       an audible tone, but is used to modulate such parameters as pitch, pan position, etc. The
       S1000 has a number of LFOs implemented in software.
     Looping
        In sampling, looping refers to the process of taking a portion of a sample and repeating it.
        The 51000 allows eight such loops to be present in a sample, allowing incredibly subtle
        variations on the basic sampled sound.

     Multisampling
       When sampling a sound, replaying it at a radically higher or lower pitch will produce
       strange and unnatural effects. To overcome this problem, samples should be taken from
       across the pitch range of an instrument and assigned to different keyspans across the
       keyboard. This is known as multisampling.

     Operating system or Operating software
       Without a computer program to send signals through the maze of chips and circuitry
       which make up the hardware of the S1000, the machine would be useless. The program
       which contains the instructions to respond to MIDI messages, buttons and controllers, and
       display messages, etc on screen (as well as to record and play back sounds) is known as
       the operating system. This is automatically loaded when the S1000 is powered up, either
       from chips inside the S 1000, or, if a disk containing a later version of the operating
       system has been placed in the drive, from disk.

     Page
        On the S1000, a page is the set of information and parameters shown at any one time on
        the display screen. Pages can be entered by pressing the named buttons (SELECT PROG ,
        MIDI, etc), or the soft keys whose legends are displayed at the bottom of a page.

      Parameter
         A value which can be changed (for instance length, tuning, upper limit of a keyspan) as
         displayed on the screen of the S1000.
      Positional crossfading
         See Crossfading.

      Program
         The term for a collection of keygroups which will all be selected together when the
         program is selected. Different programs can be assigned to different MIDI channels, so
         that when a sequencer is connected to the S1000, multi-timbral output is possible.




Page 10                                                                             Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                Introduction

     Sample
        Usually in the manual, the word sample will refer to a sound which has been recorded,
        digitized and edited, and can then be added to a keygroup (you might like to think of it as a
        "waveform" in analog synthesizer terms). However, when editing one of these sounds,
        the length and position inside this sample is also measured in samples. This latter meaning
        refers to the digitized "snapshot" image of the sound for one cycle of the sampling
        process. A sample recorded at 44.1kHz and lasting for exactly one second therefore
        contains 44,100 samples! It will usually be clear in this manual, however, what meaning
        of the word sample is meant at any one time. To sample, by the way, means "to record a
        sound on a sampler and make a sample of it".

      Soft key
         On the S1000, a button with no predefined function. The current state of the S1000
         determines the function, which is displayed on the bottom line of the page.
      Splicing
         The process of joining samples to each other (analogous to tape splicing). However,
         this is much easier electronically than when using razor blades and splicing tape,
         and many more effects are possible. To take an extreme example, the sound of a
         string section could be spliced to the sound of a bottle breaking, and the resulting
         sample then spliced to the reversed sound of the string attack.
      Velocity crossfading
          See Crossfading and Velocity zones.

      Velocity zones
         On the S1000, a sample can be programmed to play only when a key is pressed between
         certain velocities. The range of these is known as a velocity zone. Up to four samples
         may be assigned in each keygroup, and if desired, each can be assigned to a different
         velocity zone. In this way, a finger-style electric bass sample could be assigned to lower
         velocity zones, and a slap or pull bass to higher ones, with a velocity crossfade added so
         that there is an intermediate range. The result, when played, will provide a highly
         expressive bass instrument.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                             Page 11
    Introduction


     Volume
        As well as being the output level from the S1000, volume has another meaning a
        collection of programs, samples and drum settings which can be stored together on a
        diskette, on a hard disk or in memory. One volume can be stored in memory or on each
        diskette, and up to 128 volumes can be stored on a hard disk.




Page 12                                                                         Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                             Introduction


 Front panel controls
      This section describes the function of the controls on the front panel, and the general
      principles of operating the S1000. Reading this section now, and understanding the
      principles of the software user interface of the S1000 will probably save you a lot of time
      later on when you come to use the machine in earnest.




                                 S1000/S1000HD front panel




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 13
    Introduction




                                      S1000PB front panel
     Though the S1000 is a highly sophisticated sampler, you may feel that there are surprisingly
     few controls. However, each button on the front panel serves more than one function, and
     together with the 40 character x 8-line LCD display (also used for graphic displays), allow
     you to perform a wide variety of editing and other commands easily.
     Disk drive
         Since the S1000 is a sampler with 2Mbyte of RAM, sample data and programs will be lost
         when the power is turned off. The cost of backing up so much memory with batteries
         would make the S1000 a prohibitively expensive instrument. Using diskettes to store
         sample, program and other data is a cost-effective way of overcoming this problem, as
         well as providing an easily-transportable storage medium for commercial and
         "home-grown" samples. An additional advantage is provided in the easy way you can
         upgrade the operating system.
         A complex hardware/software combination such as the S1000 is always capable of being
         improved with new features. We have designed the hardware to be ready for such software
         features, and these can be added simply by turning on the S1000 with a disk containing the
         latest version of the operating system in the drive. Normally, the S1000 will "boot" the
         operating system from its own internal ROM, but if a disk containing a later version is
         inserted at power-on, this version will be loaded. This eliminates the need for troublesome
         and time-consuming ROM changes.
          At the left of the unit (near the POWER switch) is a slot for 3.5" diskettes. When inserting
          a diskette, make sure the label is facing to the right, and the metal shutter is pointing
          towards the back of the S1000.




                                                                                         Version 2.0 89/11
Page 14
                                                                           Introduction




               Insert the disk with the metal shutter first, and the label to the right


          Insert the disk until it clicks into place. To eject a disk, press the black rectangular button
          at the bottom of the disk drive. When the S1000 is reading or writing a disk
          ("accessing"), an LED on the disk drive will show this. NEVER, try to insert or remove
          a disk while this light is on! You may damage the drive and/or the data on the disk if you
          do this.
          When buying blank 3.5" disks for- use with the S1000, you can use either MF2DD
          (these are low-density disks, cheaper, but don't hold as much data), or MF2HD
          high-density disks (more expensive and capable of holding more data). Format disks for
          use with the S1000 using the HIGH or LOW options in the disk formatting page of the DISK
          menu. No harm is done by formatting high-density disks as low-density (though it's a
          waste of a high-density disk), but you probably won't be able to format MF2DD disks as
          high-density. It's better not to try this.
          You can prevent accidental erasure or overwriting of a disk by opening the small tab in
          the corner of the disk. It is a good idea to keep this small tab open all the time, unless
          you are sure that you want to write to, erase, or overwrite a disk.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                                 Page 15
      Introduction



                MAKING A COPY OF YOUR OPERATING SYSTEM DISK

               If you destroy the data on any Operating System disk supplied as a future upgrade,
               this is a) annoying, and b) expensive. Unfortunately we must make a charge for
               replacement operating system disks, and, of course, it takes time for us to deliver
               them to you. You can save yourself this potential inconvenience by making a copy of
               the operating system, as described below. These instructions are not a full guide to
               disk operations - see the relevant section for full details.
       1)      Insert the Operating System disk in the drive and turn on the power to the S1000.
       2)      The S1000 will automatically load the operating system from disk.
       3)      Wait until the disk drive light goes off, remove the Operating System disk, and store
               it in a safe place. Insert a new disk (MF2DD or MF?.HD).
       4)      Press the DISK button (the DISK LED will light), and the S1000 will inform you that
               the disk is unformatted. Press the FORM soft key (F6) once to remove the "unformatted
               disk" message, and once again to display the formatting menu.
          5)     Press the START HIGH – F7 (for MF2HD) or LOW – F8 (for MF2DD) soft
                key. The disk will be formatted, a process taking just over a minute. All
                existing data on the disk will be erased.
          6)    Now press the SAVE soft key ( F2 ). Move the cursor (using the CURSOR knob) so that
                it covers the field below the" type of save: -" message (usually
  '             this will read "ENTIRE VOLUME"). Now change the message to read "OP-
                ERATING SYSTEM", using the DATA knob.
          'n    Press GO ( F8 ). A message will be displayed saying that this will wipe the memory of
                the S1000. Since you've just turned it on, there are no samples or programs in memory
                - press GO (this time it's F7).
          8)    The S1000 will save the operating system to disk. When the disk drive light has gone
                out, eject the disk, slide the write-protect tab so that the small square hole is open (this
                will prevent you overwriting or erasing the disk accidentally), and label the disk
                clearly.
          9)     Just to check everything's gone smoothly, turn off the S1000, insert your new copy of
                 the operating system, and turn on the power. The S1000 should automatically load the
                 disk version of the operating system. If it doesn't, something's gone wrong. Repeat the
                 process again using another new disk, and if all else fails, call your AKAI dealer.

       Headphones (S1000PB)
         A stereo headphone socket (1/4 inch) is provided on the front panel. The level of the
         signal output here is adjusted by the MAIN VOLUME control (for models other than the
         S1000PB, the headphone connection is on the back panel).

       MAIN VOLUME
         This rotary control adjusts the overall output level of the LEFT/MONO, RIGHT and
         headphone outputs.




Page 16                                                                                   Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                     Introduction

     REC GAIN (not S1000PB)
       This is a 3-position slider switch (LOW, MID, HIGH) used for matching the level of the
       input source to the recording amplifier of the S1000. Fine adjustment should be carried
       out with the REC LEVEL control on the front panel. Ideally, you should set the REC
       GAIN so that the REC LEVEL is set about 2 o'clock. Remember that unlike analog
       devices, digital devices produce distortion which is particularly unpleasant, and "soft
       dipping" and the effect of saturation cannot be obtained by digital recording. You should
       always allow sufficient headroom for transient peaks when making a sample.
      REC LEVEL (not S1000PB)
        This rotary control is used when recording samples, to control the level of the signal fed
        into the S1000's recording section.
      REC IN (not S1000PB)
        Two parallel pairs of stereo balanced connectors are provided for connection of sound
        sources to be sampled. One pair is a pair of ITT-Cannon XLR-31F connectors (wired in
        accordance with American standards - 1=shield, 2=cold, 3=hot), and the other pair is a
        pair of unbalanced 1/4" phone connectors.
        Unbalanced sources can, of course, be connected to the XLR inputs. If a mono source is
        used for sampling, use only either the LEFT (MONO) XLR or phone connector.

      POWER SWITCH
        Turn on the S1000 with the power switch on the left of the front panel (press for
        on, and press again for oft). On power-on, the display will indicate the initial
        SELECT PROG page, and the LED by the SELECT PROG button will light.

  Editing controls
      While most of the features described so far are those you might expect to find on any
      top-quality keyboard, all other controls on the panel are connected in one way or another
      with the display and operations specific to the S1000.
       The display
          The display is a backlit LCD display which usually displays white against a blue
          background. When displaying characters, 8 lines of 40 characters each can be displayed.
          The display is also capable of displaying graphic information, such as a volume vs time
          display of a sample, envelope shapes and a "MIDI PPM" for checking MIDI input to the
          S1000. The contrast of the display can be adjusted using the LCD CONTRAST control
          at the bottom right of the screen.
          The bottom line of the display will always contain a row of up to eight or fewer "soft
          key" legends. These indicate the current function of the buttons immediately below the
          display (F1 - F8). These buttons have no predefined function -their use at any one time is
          defined by software - hence "soft keys". (When writing a button name as shown on the
          front panel, it will be written in this way: MIDI). Soft key legends may be of three types:
           "Selected" (white on blue). When a soft key legend is displayed in this way, it means that
           this function has been selected. In this manual, this type of legend will be displayed like
           this: TUNE.



Version 2.0 89/11                                                                             Page 17
    Introduction


          "Function" (blue on white). A soft key legend like this means that pressing the
          appropriate button will bring up another page of the display. In this manual, this type of
          legend and the soft key pressed to access this function will be represented like this: LOAD.

          "Action" (white on blue, in a box) - These soft key legends allow specific actions within a
          page on a display. These legends, and the button to press when performing these actions,
          will be represented like this: GO




      The CURSOR knob
           NOTE: As previously mentioned, the CURSOR knob is replaced on the S1000PB by a
           pair of buttons. All operations described here regarding the use of the CURSOR knob
           apply equally to the S1000PB. Simply press the appropriate button once for each click
           of the CURSOR wheel described here.

          Since the LCD display is capable of showing so much information, many parameters can
          be displayed and altered in one page. To choose which parameter will be altered, turn this
          CURSOR knob (in either direction). The cursor (the indicator showing which parameter
          may be altered - a reversed box) will move around the page as you turn the knob. Only
          those values and parameters highlighted by the cursor can be altered.

      The DATA knob
         NOTE: As previously mentioned, the DATA knob is replaced on the S1000PB by a pair
         of buttons. All operations described here regarding the use of the DATA knob apply
         equally to the S1000PB. Simply press the appropriate button once for each click of the
         DATA wheel described here.




Page 18                                                                               Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                   Introduction

         non-numeric values, turning the knob will display all the options in order. Normally,
         there is no other entry procedure - simply displaying the correct value of a parameter
         using the DATA knob selects and stores it into the S1000's memory.
         When editing numeric parameters, some of the values can be quite large, and it would be
         necessary to turn the DATA knob thousands of times (literally) in order to go through the
         whole range if the value was only changed by 1 for every click of the DATA control.
         There is an alternative to turning the knob thousands of times, though. As you move the
         cursor with the CURSOR knob onto a numeric field, you will notice that not all the
         digits are covered by the cursor immediately. Instead, they are highlighted one at a time
         from the left.
         If a number such as 12345.67 is displayed, and the CURSOR knob is turned so that only
         the first three digits are highlighted (we'll use underlining here to represent highlighting
         here), thus: 12345.67 . Turning the DATA knob clockwise by one step now will increase
         the value of the last highlighted digit, so:12445.67 .




          Now if the CURSOR knob is turned clockwise one click, the first four digits will be
          highlighted: 12445.67, and turning the DATA knob one click clockwise will produce:
          12455.67.




          If you turn the DATA knob more than ten clicks, of course, the value of the whole
          parameter will be incremented or decremented by the number of clicks. In this way, with
          very little effort, fast accurate editing of numbers can be achieved using only the two
          control knobs. The best way to learn how this works is to practise; after a short time, it
          should become second nature.
       The number buttons
         As an alternative to turning the knobs, you can also press the number buttons for direct
         entry of data. Use the +/< button to position the cursor at the left of a
         numeric field, and the -/> button to highlight digits to the right, one at a time.



Version 2.0 89/11                                                                              Page 19
    Introduction

          Pressing a number on the number keypad will enter that number at the rightmost
          highlighted position and move the cursor one position further to the right. When you
          know the exact number you want to enter (eg a program number), this can be faster than
          using the CURSOR and DATA knobs, but when experimenting (eg setting loop points),
          the knobs may be faster than the number keypad. You'll probably discover quickly what
          method works best for you in each situation.
          Remember, when selecting programs, you must press the ENT/PLAY button to
          confirm your selection.

     The eight soft keys
       As explained in the section describing the display, these buttons have no predefined
       function, but perform different jobs depending on the current state of the S1000. Common
       assignments for these soft keys are SLCT (usually F1 )which takes you back to the previous
       page, GO (usually F7 ), YES and NO.
     SELECT PROG
          This button is used to enter the main Program Selection page of the S1000. Turning the
          CURSOR knob brings the programs currently loaded in memory into view, and the
          DATA knob is used to select them. When in this mode, the LED on the button lights (as
          with all the buttons on this row when the appropriate button is pressed), to remind you of
          the currently-selected mode.

      EDIT SAMPLE (not S1000PB)
        This button is used to enter the main page for editing (including recording) samples.

      SELECT SAMPLE (S1000PB only)
        Since the S1000PB cannot record or edit samples, this button replaces the EDIT SAMPLE
           button on other models, and is used for sample selection.
      EDIT PROG
          This button is used to enter the main page for editing keygroups and programs.
      MIDI
        This button enters the main MIDI parameter page. A number of different MIDI-related
        settings can be made here.
      DISK
         Though some disk operations can be carried out from other pages, this button enters the
         page where most disk operations are carried out.

      MASTER TUNE
        Allows transposition and master tuning of the whole keyboard, as well as allowing a
        user-defined temperament to be set up.

      DRUM
        When used with one or two AKAI ME-35T audio/MIDI trigger units, the S1000 is
        capable of controlling them, making the S1000 the basis for a very sophisticated
        electronic percussion setup.




Page 20                                                                             Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                       Introduction

      OPTION
         This button is currently unimplemented. In line with the "open" design of the S1000,
        future updates to the operating system software may bring enhancements to the
        capabilities of this unit which will use this button.

      MARK/JUMP
         These two grey buttons to the right of the number keypad are used in conjunction with
        each other. If you are carrying out editing operations which require changing display
        pages a lot, these can save a lot of time and effort. Pressing the MARK
         button when the cursor is on a field will cause the S1000 to remember the position of
        the cursor, and pressing JUMP will take the cursor back to the MARKed position from any
        other page. Pressing JUMP again will take you back to the page you were at before you
        JUMPed.
         You can reset the MARKed position at any time. This position is lost when the power is
        turned off. At power-on, this position defaults to the program select field in the initial
        SELECT PROG page.
      NAME
         When samples, programs or drum input settings are changed, they should be given a
        name for easy reference. Pressing the NAME button in certain pages will enable you to
        name the data. Letters (uppercase only) are entered by pressing the front panel buttons.
        Each button has a letter following its primary function (eg DISK / M , 2 / X ), and when
        entering names, pressing the NAME button will switch the function of the number buttons
        between letters and numbers. The CURSOR knob moves the cursor around inside the
        name field when naming a sample or program.
        As an example, after positioning the cursor on a name field, the following buttons
        should be pressed to enter the name "BASS2":NAME F2 / B F1 / A 9 / S 9 / S NAME 2 / X ENT / PLAY.
         When entering names in letter mode, the + / < and - / > buttons work as backspace and
        spacebar buttons respectively (when in number mode, they enter the "+" and "-"
        characters, and the MARK and JUMP keys enter "#" and "." respectively). The last button
        enters and confirms the name, as described below.

      ENT/PLAY
         This is a dual-purpose button. When naming samples, programs, etc, pressing this button
        will end the naming process. When editing samples, however, pressing this button will
        play back the sample at its current stage of editing, without your having to set up a
        keyspan for the sample and find the correct key on a keyboard. The default note played
        when this button is pressed will be C3 (middle C) at a velocity of 127, but this can be
        altered in the MIDI TRAN page.
      This concludes the tour of the front panel. It may seem rather brief, but bear in mind that
      many buttons have many functions, and interact with each other in different display pages.
      We have judged it better to give this brief description here, and concentrate later on the
      function of each button in context.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                                Page 21
   Introduction


 The Rear Panel
     By comparison with the front panel, the rear panel is refreshingly uncomplicated, consisting
     mainly of input and output connectors.




     Audio OUTPUT connections
       There are ten audio connectors provided (all unbalanced 1/4" phone). The simplest way to
       connect the S1000 to a mixer or amplification system. is to use the LEFT/MONO and
       RIGHT stereo connectors (if you want to make mono connections, use the LEFT/MONO
       connector only).
        Use of the channel connectors (CH1 through CH8) allows much more flexibility and
        control (but of course, this will take up more input channels on the mixing console).
        Programs can be assigned to any one of these output channels (stereo programs should be
        assigned to the stereo OUTS for the full stereo effect) and effected separately.
      EFFECT SEND/REIURN
        A mono effect send and stereo effect returns (all unbalanced 1/4" phone) are provided for
        use with an external signal processor such as the AKAI AR900 digital reverb processor. A
        global ambient reverb could be added to "dry" drum samples prior to sending them to the
        mixing desk, for example. The effect send can be switched ON or OFF for each sample in
        a program (the hi-hat could be left "dry", and the toms set up to be "live", for example). If
        a mono effect processor is being used, connect the return to both RETURNs on the S1000
        using a "Y" splitter cable.

      FOOT SW
        The FOOT SW connection is used for a press-to-close (non-latching) footswitch which
        may be used to start the recording process when sampling.




Page 22                                                                             Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                       Introduction

      HEADPHONES OUT (not S1000PB)
        A stereo headphone socket is provided on the back panel of the S1000 series except the
        S1000PB (where it is provided on the front panel). The volume from this socket is
        controlled by the MAIN VOLUME knob.
      MIDI IN, OUT, THRU
          These MIDI connectors confirm to the MIDI standard. IN is used to receive external
          data (from a sequencer or audio/MIDI trigger unit) as well as for accepting System
          Exclusive data, OUT is used for transmitting Note On/Note Off and performance (pitch
          bend, aftertouch, etc) data, as well as for System Exclusive communication, and THRU
          echoes the data received at the MIDI IN terminal.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                       Page 23
    Introduction


Setting up the S1000
    This short section tells you how to get the S1000 "up and running" fast. For full details of
    other operations, refer to the appropriate explanation in this manual.
    Connections
        Start by placing the S1000 on a firm level surface or in a 19" equipment rack. Remember
        to leave adequate space for airflow above and behind the S1000 if putting it in a rack (a
        lU space is adequate).
          For now, you’ll probably want to connect a MIDI controller, such as the AKAI MX76
          master keyboard. Connect a MIDI OUT of the controller to the S1000's MIDI IN
          connector. The power-on default of the S1000 is OMNI ON, so you can leave setting
          MIDI channels till later. However, unless you want to play through headphones, make
          some audio connections. Using the LEFT/MONO and RIGHT stereo outputs will
          probably be sufficient at this stage, so connect these to two channels of a mixing console,
          and set the gain appropriately (the standard output level is -3dBv and the impedance is
          600~). Set the pan pots for the channels to hard right and hard left so that you get the full
          benefit of the stereo capabilities of the S1000. Connect the power lead to the AC supply
          and to the S1000.

                              DO NOT SWITCH ON THE S1000 YET!!

          The S1000 produces a definite power-on "thump", so make sure that the channel faders,
          master faders, or amplifier controls are set to the minimum level before turning on the
          S1000. In addition, before switching on, if you are loading a later version of the operating
          system from disk, take the Operating System diskette and insert it in the drive so that the
          latest version of the operating system will be loaded when you turn the power on. Now you
          can turn the power on.




Page 24                                                                                      Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                           Sampler functions


2 Sampler functions
    This section deals with the sampler functions of the S1000. If you are unfamiliar with the
terminology used by AKAI for their samplers, or the general method of operation, and you have
not read the Glossary or descriptions of the controls, go back and read these sections now. It will
save you a lot of time later on.




 Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 25
Sampler functions


 SELECT PROG
     Unlike a synthesizer, you cannot play the S1000 straight away - you must load samples,
     keygroups and programs from disk first.
     Getting started and checking out - playing supplied factory samples
        When the operating system message has cleared from the bottom line of the display, you
        will be in the main SELECT PROG page (the SELECT PROG will be lit). Remove the
        Operating System disk (if you've used it to load a later version of the operating system),
                                                                                       ,
        and insert one of the supplied sample disks. Now press the DISK button (F5 not the DISK
        button on the bottom row). After a short time, the words "LOAD FROM DISK" should be
        displayed at the top left hand corner of the page.




          A list of all the programs and samples on the disk will be displayed on the left side of the
          page, which extends below the bottom of the screen. You can scroll through the list (for
          information) using the CURSOR knob.
          To load the entire contents of the disk, you will have to use one of the soft keys -in this
          case VOL (F8 )When you press this button, you will be asked to confirm this (press F8 - YES)
          – the disk drive LED will come on, and you can see the bottom line of the display
          showing the programs and samples being loaded. All samples and programs currently in
          memory will be erased. When the disk drive light has gone off, eject the disk, and keep it
          with the rest in a safe place (not near magnetic fields such as speakers, power supplies,
          TVs or transformers, and away from where some careless person can spill coffee over it).
          Now press the SLCT button (F1). Underneath the "PROGRAMS IN MEMORY" at the top of the
          page, you will see a list of the programs you have just loaded from the disk. As the page
          tells you, you can see them all by scrolling through with the CURSOR knob, and select
          one by using the DATA knob (the number on the right side of the page changes, and an
          asterisk is displayed next to the selected program). Alternatively, use the number buttons
          to make a direct selection, followed by ENT / PLAY
          Now play the keyboard and listen. Remember, what you're hearing are edited samples - if
          you don't like these programs, you can go back to the raw samples, trim them, add loops,
          resample at different frequencies, and then using the EDIT PROG mode, add filter, After
          touch modulation, alter the EG settings, add in other
          samples, etc (if you're using a S1000PB, you can use the EDIT PROG functions, but not
          the EDIT SAMPLE functions).




Page 26                                                                               Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                  Sampler functions

          This is where your creativity comes in. The hard work of assembling a string section in a
          top studio and recording them playing one note has been done for you .
          A powerful (and useful) feature of the S1000 is its ability to continue sounding a
          sustained note of a program, even when another program has been selected. With most
          synthesizers and samplers, changing a patch or program automatically stops the sound
          from the machine until a key is pressed. The S1000, however, continues to sound the
          release or sustained portion of a program during and after program changes. This makes
          for "seamless sound" when sequencing with a lot of Program Change messages.

      Renumbering




          On the S1000, program numbers correspond to patch numbers on a synthesizer. When a
          MIDI Program Change message is received, the appropriate program is selected.
          However, to match S1000 programs with the patch numbers on your synthesizer, you
          may want to renumber the programs, so that selecting a brass sound on the S1000 will
          call up a similar (or complementary) patch on a remote synthesizer module. To do this,
          press the RNUM button. As the screen informs you on this page, you select the program to
          be renumbered using the CURSOR, knob, and alter the current number to the new
          number using the DATA knob. You can also use the number pad for this, setting the
          program number to a value of between 1 and 128 (these are MIDI specification limits).
          When you have altered the number, press GO. The programs in memory will be resorted
          according to the new number. Carry on renumbering programs until you are happy with
          the final result, and then press SLCT to return to the main SELECT PROG page.

       Programs with the same number
          Most synthesizers do not allow you to assign the same number to different patches.
          However, the S1000 allows you to have many programs with the same number. This is
          not an oversight, but is a way of allowing you to select more than one program
          simultaneously with one selection procedure or Program Change command. Each
          program could be set to a different MIDI channel for multi-timbral work with a
          sequencer, for instance, or different programs could be split over the keyboard for live
          work. Bear this in mind when renumbering - it's a very powerful feature of the S1000.




Version 2.0 89/ 11                                                                           Page 27
 Sampler functions

     Play response
        From the main SELECT PROG page, press the RESP button. This allows you to make
        "instant" adjustments to parameters for which you might otherwise have to do a lot of
        button-pressing. Settings made here override settings made in the EDIT SAMPLE, EDIT
        PROD or MIDI modes.




          On the first line of the PLAY RESPONSE page is the name of the program whose
          parameters are to be changed. You can select a program to be changed by using the DATA
          knob or the + / < and - / > buttons. Note that when you have selected a program for changing,
          this is not necessarily the same as the program selected in the main SELECT PROG page.
          Playing the keyboard or the ENT / PLAY button will play the program which is currently
          selected from the main SELECT PROG page, not the one whose parameters are being
          edited here.
          The first parameter which can be altered is the MIDI channel on which this program can be
          played ("MIDI channel"). Set this to a value from 1 to 16, or OM (OMNI).
          The channel on which Program Change information is received may be selected in the
          MIDI mode to be OMNI or any other channel, so that, program changes can be made
          independently of this MIDI channel setting.
          The S1000 is capable of playing up to sixteen notes (samples) at one time. The next
          parameter, "polyphony", allows you to select how many notes (1 to 16) can be played at a
          time by this particular program. If the program allows a large number of notes to be played,
          but other programs have to play other notes over the maximum of 16, more notes may be
          "stolen" from these programs (see the "priority" parameter below).
          The "priority" parameter allows you to specify how notes will be "stolen" by other
          programs if this is necessary. There are four settings: LOW, NORM, HIGH and HOLD. If a
          program is set to LOW priority, then notes from this program will be "stolen" first. If set to
          HIGH, then notes from other programs with lower priority will be "stolen" before they are
          stolen for this program. NORM is, of course, normal priority, between HIGH and LOW. If
          you are playing a complex piece of music using many programs, it is a good idea to set
          important, "lead-line" programs to HIGH, and less important background programs to
          LOW. HOLD is a special priority. If a program's priority is set to HOLD, notes from this
          program can only be "stolen" by the same program.




                                                                                     Version 2.0 89/11
Page 28
                                                         Sampler functions

      The "keyrange" of this program is the next setting. The high and low points may be
      displayed as either MIDI note numbers or as note names. To toggle between the two types
      of display, press RESP. When editing notes, if the display is in the note name mode,
      highlighting only the first part of the name will increment or decrement the value by one
      semitone for each click of the DATA knob. If the whole of the note name is covered, then
      each dick of the DATA knob will increment or decrement the value by an octave.
          The pitch of the program may be shifted by t2 octaves ("octave shift"). This allows
          you to compensate for the keyboard position of the program if you are playing a
          split-keyboard combination of programs.
          You can assign which individual output channel will be used by the program by setting
          the "mono output" parameter. However, this output number is a "base" number, which
          may be altered in the SMP2 page of the EDIT PROG mode, so the results may not be
          exactly what you expect.
          The S1000 is fitted with an effects loop. Set the "effect output" parameter to ON if
          you want the program to be sent through the effects loop, otherwise, set it to OFF.
          The level of the program sent through the stereo output connectors may be adjusted from
          00 to 99 using the "stereo level" parameter. Note that this has no effect on the
          overall level as sent through the individual channel outputs.
           The position in the stereo image when the program is sent from the stereo outputs can be
           adjusted by the neat parameter. "pan position". The values for this range from L50
           (panned hard left) through MID (the signal is sent equally to the left and right outputs) to
           R50 (panned hard right).
           The final parameter on this page is "basic loudness", which allows you to adjust the
           volume of the program as output from ail outputs (including the headphone socket).

      Deleting programs
         Programs and their associated samples may be deleted from memory in this page, which
         is accessed by pressing the DEL button. When this page is displayed, the cursor will
         highlight a program. Highlight the program you want to delete using the CURSOR knob.
         There are three soft key actions that you can take, all concerned with deleting programs:
         PROG, PNUM, and ALL!.




Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                               Page 29
Sampler functions

          Note- If you delete a program from memory, make sure that you really do not
          Need that program in the future, or that you have saved it to disk first. In some
          cases, as explained below, deleting a program will also delete samples. Make
          sure these really are unwanted, or have been saved to disk before proceeding.

          Pressing PROG will ask you if you want to delete one program ? Either GO or ABORT the
          deletion procedure. If the program is the only one in memory using         a particular set of
          samples, you will be asked whether you want to delete those       samples at the same time.
          Press the appropriate soft key if you are sure that you   want to delete the program and its
          associated samples.
           The PNUM button will delete all programs which have the same number as the highlighted
           program. You will be asked if you want to proceed with the bulk program delete ! ?. If
           these programs are the only ones using particular samples, you will be asked if you want
           to delete the samples as well.
            ALL! is, of course, the most drastic of these three options. If you answer GO and YES to
           the question regarding released samples, then all programs, except for an S1000-generated
           program (TEST PROGRAM) and samples will be deleted. Deleting samples and
           rearranging memory space will take a little time, so be patient while this takes place.
           Obviously, this is an option to be used with some caution.

     Disk operations
        Pressing DISK (F5) in the SELECT PROG mode gives you a choice of two options: loading
        a program and its associated samples (P+S )or loading the entire contents of the disk (VOL ).
           If you have inserted a disk, pressing DISK will bring up a list of all programs stored on that
           disk. If you have inserted the wrong disk, press the F5 button again (it now says DISK)
           after you have changed disks. If you want to wipe out all programs and samples in
           memory and load the contents of the disk, press VOL . You will be asked if this is what you
           really want to do. Make sure that you either do not want the programs and samples in
           memory, or that they are saved safely to disk before you proceed.




Page 30                                                                                 Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                         Sampler functions


         The other option, P+S , allows you to load a program and all associated samples (free
         memory permitting). To do this, highlight a program using the CURSOR knob, and press
         P+S . The program, and its associated samples, will be loaded into memory. If the samples
         required by this program already exist in memory, they will be loaded anyway, but they
         will overwrite the memory samples. If there is not enough memory to load a program
         and its samples, the message "! ! insufficient waveform memory ! ! " will
         be displayed. In this case, you will have to delete some existing programs and/or samples
         to free up some memory space.
         Other disk operations, like saving and formatting disks, are performed in the DISK
         mode, not from this page.
      Conclusion
        So far, you have been using the S1000 as a preset synthesizer, loading and playing
        programs from disk. However, part of the joy of using a sampler is in creating and
        editing your own sounds, and the next section covers this.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                          Page 31
   Sampler functions


 Recording samples

      NOTE for S1000PB users: The following sections do not apply to the S1000PB. Please
      ignore these sections, and resume at the section headed "SELECT SAMPLE (S1000PB
      only)" (page 49).

     When you start sampling, you must have a clean area of memory to do it, and enough
     memory to work in. In sampling, it is better to start with too much memory space than too
     little. You can always "top and tail" a sample later on, but you cannot create memory out of
     thin sir.




     Restart your S1000. Press the EDIT SAMPLE button, and you are in a position to start recording
     and editing a blank sample, whose name defaults to "NEW SAMPLE". The first thing to do is to
     name the sample. Give it a meaningful name of up to 12 characters for a mono sample - 10
     characters for stereo (press NAME and use the other buttons to enter a name ENT/PLAY when
     done). A name such as "HUGHS SAMPLE" will mean nothing in a month's time, while
     "HUGHS BASS" will at least tell you what kind of instrument the sample refers to. The
     reason why 2 fewer characters are allowed in a stereo sample is that the S1000 automatically
     adds "-L" and "-R" to the two sample names when creating a sample, and any characters you
     add in the 11th and 12th positions will automatically be overwritten. Now COPY the NEW
     SAMPLE to your work area with the name you've just entered.
     The "monitoring program" can be set to either MONITOR or a program name. This
     enables you choose what sound will be heard when you press ENT/PLAY button. Usually, you
     should set this to MONITOR.
      While we're in this page, let's look at the other facilities provided. In addition to access the
      REC1, REC2, ED.1 and ED.2 pages (of which, more later), you can also copy, rename, or delete the
      chosen sample (as displayed on the top line) from memory.
      Note that these three last operations do not affect the samples as stored on disk. If you delete a
      sample from memory, this will not delete it from disk. Of course, if you have not previously
      stored a sample to disk before deleting it from memory, that's the end of your sample! To copy
      a sample to another area of memory, use the NAME button to enter a new name (and then
      confirm it with the ENT/PLAY button). Then press the COPY button. A copy of the original sample
      will now be stored in memory under the new name. If there is not enough memory to store the
      new copy, the display will show this when you press the COPY button. Renaming follows the
      same procedure - enter a new name, and then press the REN button. The original sample will
      still be there in the same place in memory, but under a new name. Pressing the DEL.




                                                                                       Version 2.0 89/11
Page 32
                                                                           Sampler functions

     button will delete the sample from memory. When you press the DEL, button, you will be
     prompted to either GO ahead with the operation, or ABORT it. This is a "safety-net" to help
     you avoid accidental deletion of precious samples.
     Now is a good time to connect your sample source. Turn the REC LEVEL down to the
     minimum level. If it's a mono source, use either of the L connectors (the XLR connectors are
     balanced, but you can sample unbalanced sources using the 1/4" phone sockets), otherwise
     make appropriate connections to the L and R inputs. If you use the phone connectors, the
     XLR connectors are automatically disabled. Set the REC GAIN switch on the back panel to
     match your source (line, mic or other). The three positions are: HIGH = -58dBm, MID =
     -38dBm, and LOW = -18dBm.
      Press REC1 to enter the first recording page. The name of your sample is displayed at the top,
      and the cursor is displayed over the MONO/STEREO parameter.

  STEREO or MONO?
    At this point it is worth looking into some of the pros and cons of stereo vs mono sampling.
    However miraculous the S1000 may seem, it can't perform the magic trick of turning a mono
    sample into a stereo sample. Stereo samples use up twice as much memory as mono samples,
    but if you have a good stereo sound source, it seems a shame to waste it and convert it into
    mono. It's up to you to choose; think what the sample's going to be used for before you
    record.
    REC7 parameters
        The parameters in this page are (in the order that the cursor finds them):

      mode
        as explained above, either STEREO or MONO.
      (V)iew
         When making a mono sample, this will remain at LEFT, but when making a stereo
         sample, you can choose either LEFT or RIGHT. It refers to which volume/time graph is
         produced for viewing when recording.
      start
         There are three ways in which you can start sampling-. INPUT LEVEL, MIDI NOTE
         and FOOTSWITCH1. The usual method is INPUT LEVEL - when the signal input to the
         S1000 goes above the level that you have set up, sampling will begin automatically.
         However, if you are trying to sample one sound or passage from the middle of a piece of
         prerecorded music, you will need to initiate the recording process manually, either by a
         MIDI NOTE ON message, or by pressing the footswitch connected to the FOOT SW
         connector on the back panel.
      monitor
        The "monitor" parameter allows you to choose how you will listen to the recorded source
        as it is passed through the S1000 ("audio THRU"). Setting this parameter to OFF will
        never allow the sound to be passed through the S1000 to the outputs (if you're recording
        with a microphone and want to avoid feedback) - and setting it ON wi11 always pass it
        through to the outputs. Setting it to AUTO will enable the input signal to be passed
        through only when recording a sample or preparing to do so (in the REC2 page).




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 33
Sampler functions


          Under the "monitor" parameter is a message telling you how much memory is
          free, both as a number of 16-bit words, and as a percentage of total memory
          available. If you have followed the instructions so far, this will read
          "1048064=100%". 1048064 words are equal to 2 megabytes for obscure
          computer-based reasons which are too tedious to explain here. These values cannot
          be changed.

      sample name
         If you want to select or enter an existing sample name for re-recording, you can do it here
         with the DATA knob or the NAME button and letter/number buttons. This field will not
         allow you to rename the sample.

      bandwidth
         Either 10kHz or 20kHz. These figures refer to the audio bandwidth of the completed
         sample - not the sampling frequency, which is either 44.1kHz or 22.05kHz (for the
         technically minded, Nyquist's theorem' applies here). Sampling at the lower frequency
         will give you more memory, but filter out the top octave. For some sampled sounds this
         may not matter - like the choice between stereo and mono, it's up to you, and the final use
         of your sample.

      orig. pitch
          (original pitch) - default is C_3. Incidentally, if you prefer to work with MIDI note
          numbers rather than key names, press the REC1 key again to display the MIDI note
          number. This feature is available in all pages which use note names and note numbers.
          Make this parameter equal to the pitch of the sample source. For unpitched sounds, of
          course, this can be any value.

      record tim:
         (recording time). Once the S1000 starts sampling it will carry on until it runs to the end of
         the time set here (you can set this field to one-hundredth of a second precision). As you
         alter the value here, you will see the figures underneath change, showing you the amount
         of memory that this time represents, in bytes, and as a percentage of total memory
         available.
      SOFT KEYS

        SLCT
           The SLCT button takes you back to the opening page of the EDIT SAMPLE section. Any
           soft key labelled in this way will usually take you back one level of page.

       REC1
         Pressing this button toggles between MIDI note number and key name display.

        REC2
           Enters the second recording page -- where the actual recording of a sample takes place.




1 Nyquist's theorem (sometimes known as Shannon's sampling theorem) is a mathematical statement that a
digital-analog or anaor -digital conversion process needs a digital data rate of more than twice the highest analog
frequency in er to convert data with no distortion. The nature of the low-pass filtering employed affects the exact
ratio.



Page 34                                                                                         Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                  Sampler functions


     ED.1
            Enters the first sample editing page.
      ED:2
            Enters the second sample editing page.

       DIGI
            When fitted with the optional digital interface board QB-104), the S1000 is capable of
            recording and transmitting samples through a digital interface, either optical or electrical.
            However, unless this board has been fitted, there is little point in your using this button
            (unless you want to see what you're missing by not having a digital interface!).


      The REC2 page




            This page is the page where the actual recording takes place. Most of the parameters you
            can alter here are the same as the ones in the R.EC 1 page - from the position of the
            cursor when the page is first entered, they are:

      MONO/STEREO
        If you've changed your mind about whether the sample's going to be a mono or stereo
        sample, now's the time to change the setting on the S1000.
      V (view)
         (View) - either the left or right input on this graphical representation of the sample.

      Sample name
        Change this if you want to change the selection of an existing sample over which you are
        about to record.
      -20dB (level)
         This is the default value for the "trigger level" - the level above which the S1000 will
         start sampling if you have previously chosen INPUT LEVEL for the start of sampling.
         As you change this parameter, watch the hollow box on the left of the page expand and
         contract. The input signal is represented by a solid bar (starting from the bottom of the
         page), which gets higher as the signal level increases and acts as a PPM. You should set
         the trigger level to be just below the signal level at which sampling should begin.

      ptch: (pitch)
      (Pitch) - the original pitch of the sample source.


Version 2.O 89/11                                                                                 page 35
Sampler functions

     tim: (time)
        (Time) Again, you can choose the total amount of time for your new sample. This field
        can be set to the nearest one-hundredth of a second, and the number of bytes and the
        percentage of total memory used will be changed accordingly.
     SOFT KEYS
       The soft keys in this page are how you actually perform sampling. Two soft keys, METR
       and MOFF , allow you to turn the LCD graphic PPM (at the left side of the page) on and off.
       As the signal is input to the S1000, you will see the solid bar go up and down in
       accordance with the level of the signal. Use these keys to "preview" before a "take", so
       that you can adjust the recording level, gain and input trigger appropriately. As with all
       recording processes, setting the level high will increase the final signal-to-noise ratio, but
       remember that digital clipping is an extremely unpleasant effect, and once recorded,
       cannot be eliminated.
     Recording
          To start the recording process, press the ARM button. Only two soft keys will be active
          now: Go and EXIT. The Go button can be used as a manual override for whatever start
          setting you selected in the REC1 page (ie recording will start when this is pressed, rather
          than when the footswitch is pressed, a MIDI note is received, or the signal goes above the
          trigger level). However, normally you should wait for the S1000 to begin recording
          automatically. The EXIT button is useful as a panic button - if you suddenly notice you've
          set something up wrongly, or you're about to record the wrong sound.
           Once the recording process is started (or you press the GO key), there is no way you can
           stop the recording process, which will continue inexorably till it reaches the end of the
           selected recording time. As the signal is input, a graph of the logarithmic value (decibel
           value) of the signal level versus time is displayed.
           Use the : ENT/PLAY button to replay your recorded sample. The pitch and velocity are
           determined in the MIDI TRAN page (default C3, velocity 127). If you have too much
           blank time at the end - don't worry, you can trim this off. Likewise, if you pushed the Go
           button too early, but you still have all your sample, you can trim off the unwanted
           beginning later on. If you're not satisfied with your sample, re-record it, otherwise:

                              NOW SAVE YOUR SAMPLE TO DISK!
          Remember Murphy's Law: "Anything that can go wrong, will". (The Law of Murphy the
          Elder states: "Things that cannot go wrong, will".) Once you've made that perfect take,
          there will be a power cut, someone will trip over a cable, or you'll press the wrong button
          (we all do at one time or another - no-one's perfect). Seriously, though, saving raw
          samples to disk as soon as you've made them is good standard operating procedure - you
          lose less sleep that way. Also, if you make a mistake in the editing process, you can go
          back to where you started from.
          Press the ~ button. If you already have a blank formatted disk (prepared for use with the
          S1000) insert it, otherwise format the disk by inserting a new disk and pressing FORM.
          Choose either HIGH or LOW density format. When formatting is finished, you can carry on.




Page 36                                                                              Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                             Sampler function


         Press the SAVE button and select CURSOR ITEM ONLY for "type of save:”. Then move
         the cursor over the sample you've just made, and press GO. The sound will be safely
         stored on disk.
          If you're doing multisampling of one source, or making a lot of samples at one time,
          carry on recording and saving to disk. Otherwise, it's time to start editing your samples.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                              Page 37
Sampler functions


 Editing samples




     This is where things really start to get interesting. From the main EDIT SAMPLE page, press the
     ED.1 button to get to the first editing page. This is the TRIM page, where you can cut off
     unwanted parts of your sample. If you've made a stereo sample, make sure that the “mode:"
     field at the top reads "STEREO". This means that you are working on two samples
     simultaneously - half as much work! If you want different effects for the left and right
     samples, or you're working on a mono sample, choose "MONO".




     The start and end positions of the sample are given in the second line of this page. As you
     move the cursor to cover these fields and then alter the values (using the DATA knob and/or
     number keys) you will see a vertical line moving across the screen, giving you an idea of
     where the start and end points will be set in relation to the whole sample. By pressing the
     ENT/PLAY button, you can hear the effect of setting the start and end points. However, these
     changes will not be stored permanently until you press the CUT button. When you do this, if
     you have trimmed off a substantial portion of the sample, you will notice the "percentage
     free" display in the top right of the screen change, showing that memory has been released.
     Once you have made a trim, there is no way of getting the trimmed portion back, except by
     reloading the "raw" sample from disk.




Page 38                                                                             Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                            Sampler functions

     To further assist you, there are a number of soft keys assigned which are also found in other
     pages. This is a good time to examine the function of the ZIN (zoom in) and
      ZOUT (zoom out) buttons. As you press the ZIN button repeatedly, you will notice the
     volume/time display become higher and higher resolution until it eventually is displayed at
     individual sample level. Usually, the S1000 will attempt to keep the start or end point within
     the "window" currently being viewed. If you lose this vertical line, try turning the DATA
     knob to bring it into view, or use the ZOUT button to get a bigger overview. The F7 button
     changes its function with every press - from > to <, and will allow you to change the area
     you are viewing between the start and end points of the sample.




      LOOPING
        This is probably one of the most delicate operations in sampling - allowing you to
        specify parts of a recorded sample to be repeated, for special effects, or so that a
        smoothly sustained note can be produced. The S1000 allows you an incredible amount of
        flexibility in these operations - up to eight looping points can be specified.
        For example, in the illustration below, the vocal phrase "Pump up the house" has been
        recorded. When it is to be replayed, we want a "stutter" effect on the first part of the
        word "pump", and the final "s" of the word "house" to be looped as long as the key is
        held down, and then to fade out. We achieve this by setting two loop points - one for a
        finite time, which gives us four repetitions of the "pu" sound, and the last loop is set to
        "HOLD" (an infinite time) to give us the effect we want.
           From the TRIM page, press the LOOP button to access the looping control page. Again,
           you will see a display of the sample's volume against time, in the left part of the display,
           together with a magnified display of the point where the loop rejoins the original sample
           sound. You can use the ZIN and ZOUT keys to zoom in or out of this window, but the
           display of the whole sample remains at a constant magnification.




Version 2..0 89/11                                                                             Page 39
Sampler functions




          LOOP: First select the loop number that you want to set (top left). Unless you set the loop
          time to HOLD, loops will be repeated in numerical order. It is not possible to set a loop
          inside a loop.
          time: Next, set the time (in milliseconds) that you want the loop to repeat for. Values
          below "1" will be treated as OFF - ie the loop will have no effect, and values of 10
          seconds or over will be treated as "HOLD" - the loop will continue as long as the key
          remains depressed. A loop will repeat for the greatest whole number of times possible
          within the loop time set here. For instance, if the total loop time is set to 250mS, and the
          length of the loop is actually 175mS, the loop will only repeat once, not 1.428 times. This
          can save you a lot of calculation when you've set the loop length and you want a particular
          "stutter" effect or repeated drum beat.
          Next on the top line is the sample you are working on. If you press the ENT/PLAY button and
          an unexpected sound comes out, select the sample you want in this field. After the
          selected sample name, the amount of memory space free (expressed as a percentage) is
          displayed.
          at: Now you can select the point at which looping will begin - ie when playback reaches
          this point, it will go back and repeat a loop for the number of times determined by the
          loop time.




Page 40                                                                              Version 2.0 89/ 11
                                                                                           :::::


                                                                          Sampler functions

         lgth: (length) The actual length of the looped portion (as opposed to the length of time
         that the loop will repeat) is set in the next field. As you adjust this parameter and the
         "at:" parameter, you will see two vertical lines move in the left part of the display,
         giving the approximate position of the start and end points of the loop.




          Xfd: This field determines the number of samples which will be cross-faded when the X-
          FD button is pressed (see below).

           FIND This button starts an "autolooping" process within the S1000. It takes the length
          setting previously made, and starts counting down from this value every time the button
          is pressed, attempting to find a loop point automatically. However, since the S1000 is a
          computer, it's better at logical rather than intuitive or creative thinking, and the loop
          points that it finds may not correspond to the loop points you actually want. For all these
          limitations, it can save you a lot of time.
           X-FD This button can help "hide the seams" in loop points. When a value is set in the "xf
          d : " field, the S1000 will start fading out the main body of the sound and fading in the
          loop portion. The number set in the field determines the point at which this crossfading
          will start. NOTE: Pressing the x-FD button will permanently alter the sample. It's probably
          a good idea to press this button only if you have a copy already stored on disk.
           For ordinary looping procedures (creating artificial sustain portions of a sample),
          usually one loop point will be sufficient. The trick here is to find a looping point which
          follows some of the basic rules below:
          Try to match up levels between looped portions and samples (zero crossing points), so
          that there are no sudden "glitch" points. The FIND button will help you with this.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                                  Page 41
Sampler functions

          As well as the level being the same, the overall direction of the two curves (as shown in
          the right side of the display) should match (ie both should be rising or both falling).
          If you're trying to sustain a note using a loop, make sure that the pitch of the note is
          steady within the loop, otherwise there will be strange jumps in pitch.
          Loop lengths which are too short will generate harmonics - a "tuned buzz". If this
          happens, try increasing the loop length. However, for decay portions of a guitar sound, for
          example, short loops can be effective.
          As explained earlier, the "autolooping" function of the S1000 is not perfect - but it's
          usually much quicker than trying to find loop points by yourself. If, despite all efforts, the
          FIND button doesn't give you the loop you want, try moving the "at:" point, and
          lengthening the loop size. Some loop points will produce cleaner looping than others.




                  This is a poor choice of loop points. The sudden rise from the end
                       of the loop to the beginning will cause audible "glitches"




              This is a much better choice of loop points. The rise from the end to the
                   beginning will be less audible, and any "glitches" can be almost
                                   entirely eliminated using crossfading


          TRIM This button will take you back to the TRIM page, where you can retrim the start and
          end of a sample. If, after setting loop points, the new start or end point of a sample fall
          within a loop, the screen will display this, and the new start or end point will be ignored.
          You must go back to the LOOP page and move these loops, or set them to OFF if you
          want the new start or end points to take effect.



Page 42                                                                                Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                            Sampler functions

     JOIN
       This page (accessed by pressing the JOIN button from the TRIM page) allows cutting,
       mixing or joining samples or parts of samples to each other. If the mood takes you, it is
       possible to join a chord from a Beethoven symphony onto the end of a reversed cymbal
       sample. Other, more practical, examples will no doubt suggest themselves.
        The samples to be joined together are known here as A and B, and the resulting JOINed
        sample is called J. Though A and B can be the same sample, the resulting (J) sample
        cannot be the same as either A or B. Press NAME to enter a new sample name for J.
        Existing samples can be overwritten and therefore can be used for J.
        As mentioned earlier, this page has three basic functions: to copy a part of a sample to
        another sample (A->J ), to splice a sample (or part of a sample) to another sample .(SPLI) or
        to mix two samples (or parts of samples) together (MIX ). In addition, other pages can be
        accessed using the other soft keys (SLCT, TRIM, LOOP and ED.2 ).
        The principles behind these three operations are similar, and so the operations common
        to all of them will be described together.
          Select the A and B samples, using the DATA knob or the +/< and -/>) buttons. You must
          then choose a name for the J sample. This can either be the name of an existing,
          unwanted sample, or you can enter a new name using the NAME button.
          Now you should select the portions of the A and B samples which are to be combined ("
          first" and "last "). You may want to splice the attack portion of A to the sustain
          portion of B, or mix parts of two samples together. If you want to hear exactly what part
          of a sample you are going to use, you can set the first and last points of A, and then press
          A->J so that only the relevant part of A will be played when you press the ENT/PLAY button
          (you can overwrite J later, and you've done no permanent damage to A if you get things
          wrong).
          Notice how the figures at the bottom alter as the lengths of samples A and B are
          changed. The figure before the "spli" is the total length of the selected portions of the
          two samples (minus the X-fade length -- see below), and the figure before the "mix" is
          the length of the longest sample portion to be included.
          X-fade over To avoid a sharp break in sounds when you splice (SPLI) them together, one
          sound can be faded into another for a certain number of samples. The crossfading will
          start before the "last" point of A, the time at which crossfading starts depending on the
          number of samples set in this field. Crossfading has no effect, of course, on mixing
          samples together.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                              Page 43
 Sampler functions




          You can adjust the relative volumes of A and B by +25dB, using the "scale" parameters.
          However, if you put these too high, you may get a distorted sound, so use these with care.
          When you've set up the start and end points for both samples, you can MIX them together
          or splice them (SPLI ), press the appropriate button. If sample J already contains data, you
          will be asked if you want to overwrite it (GO or ABORT). Now wait, as the process will
          take a few seconds (depending on the length of the samples, and the amount of
          crossfading). When the operation is complete, you can listen to the new sound by pressing
          the ENT/PLAY button. If you're happy with the new sound, save it to disk, otherwise carry on
          joining and mixing till you get the sound you want.
          Of course, any loops which were present in the original samples (A and B) will not be
          played back when you play back J. You must reset loops in J if you want them.
          Though the process of creating the sound you want may take sometime, it's possible you
          may discover some new sounds along the way which weren't quite what you were
          expecting, but could find a place in later compositions.

      ED.2
        The ED.2 page (accessed from the EDIT SAMPLE SLCT or JOIN page) allows you to
        perform some further sophisticated editing functions. On the PARAMETERS page (the
        first one you access when you press the ED.2 button), the first parameter is the name of the
        sample you want to edit. This may be changed with the DATA knob or the + / <
        and - / > buttons.




Page 44                                                                              Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                       Sampler functions
                                                                        .:




          The next parameter allows you to alter the original pitch at which the sample was
          recorded, so that when you replay it on the keyboard, it will come out at the correct
          pitch. Further fine tuning (in semitones and cents) can be done with the next parameter.
          The next parameter determines the way in which the sample will be played back. There
          are four options available here.
          The first is LOOP IN RELEASE. This means that when a key is pressed, the sample will
          play through all the loops until the first HOLD loop is reached. When the key is
          released, the HOLD loop will continue to play as the release falls away.
          LOOP UNTIL RELEASE is slightly different. Again, the sample will play, with all
          loops, until the first HOLD loop is reached. However, when the key is released, the loop
          will end, and the remaining portion of the sample (if any) will be played. This is a useful
          setting for sounds which have a definite attack, an indefinite sustain period (set with the
          loop), and a definite release characteristic.
          The next setting, NO LOOPING, does what its name suggests - it plays the sample
          through without loops for as long as the key is held down. As soon as the key is released,
          the sound will start to decay.
          PLAY TO SAMPLE END is useful for drum trigger units such as the ME-35T and
          the like. Like the previous setting, no loops are played, but an instantaneous trigger
          signal or key press will play the whole of the sample (the key does not have to be
          pressed for the whole length of the sample).
          The last parameter, "loop tune off set" allows you seta pitch shift for a HOLD loop
          by +50 cents (one semitone). This shift will only occur once on the first occurrence of the
          loop. Subsequent loops will be replayed at the shifted pitch of the first loop, ie this tuning
          offset is not an incremental process.
          There is one "action" button - REV . When this soft key is pressed, the sample will be
          reversed. Pressing REV again will reverse the sample back to its original form. Note that
          any loop points you have set will stay in the same absolute positions, and will not be
          reversed with the sample.

      TIME
          Pressing the TIME button from the ED.2 page enters the TIME-STRETCH page. This
          enables you to lengthen or shorten a sample or a selected part of a sample from 25% of
          its original length to 2000% (twenty times). Since this operation can
          take a lot of memory, it's as well to delete unwanted samples from memory (after you've
          made sure that they're saved to disk).
          Uses for time-stretching include: altering the length of a sampled rhythm passage to fit in
          with the rest of the track without altering the pitch, maintaining the same vibrato speed
          for a number of "multi-samples" created from one original sample, and fitting sound
          effects, vocal phrases, etc to video soundtracks for precise timing. Two modes are
          available for stretching: CYCLIC, in which a fixed interpolation rate is maintained
          throughout the whole of the sample (suitable for individual instrument samples), and
          INTELL, in which the S1000 "intelligently" varies the interpolation rate according to the
          sample content (suitable for speech and music).




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                               Page 45
Sampler functions




          Select the sample to be stretched on the top line of the page, and then move down a line to
          select the part of the sample that you want stretched ("stretch zone" and "to").
          When you have selected the part of the sample to be stretched, you can listen to this part
          of the sample by pressing the ZONE button. This will replay this part of the sample
          stretched at the set cycle length (but only if you are using CYCLIC mode).
          Since you cannot stretch a sample to itself, you must find another name for the new
          sample. Use the NAME button to enter a new sample name. You can use an existing sample
          name for this (but make sure that you don't want this sample any more, or you have a
          copy saved to disk).
          There are two ways in which you can stretch a sample ("stretch mode") - either by picking
          a fixed cycle time at which the S1000 will stretch (CYCLIC), or by allowing the S1000 to
          make its own decisions as it proceeds with the stretching (INTELL). Be warned, though -
          although the intelligent mode will produce better results, the time taken for this operation
          is much longer than when the CYCLIC mode (up to several minutes).
           If you decide to use the CYCLIC mode, you can set the cycle length (in samples) in the
           "Cycle length" field. The soft key autC can be used to help you find the right sample
           length. As with autolooping, the S1000 applies software logic to the sample to calculate
           what it believes is the right answer. Again, like autolooping, what the S1000 calculates
           will often help you, but it is not always infallible.




Page 46                                                                              Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                           Sampler functions

          The next parameter to set up is the time factor by which the original sample is to be
          stretched (from 25% to 2000%). As this is altered, the length and time of the new
          stretched sample (and the percentage of memory it will occupy) are displayed. Make
          sure that these figures do not exceed the amount of memory available. These figures also
          vary, of course, according to the length of the portion of the original sample which is to
          be stretched.
          The "quality" (the time that the S1000 spends determining cycle lengths) and the
          "width" of stretch crossfading in the final stretched sample may also be altered from 0l
          to 99. This only applies to the INTELL mode.
          When you are ready, press GO, You can abort the operation by holding down F8 , for a
          few seconds, otherwise the process may take a few minutes (depending on the length of
          the sample being stretched). The display will display a message showing that the
          time-stretch is in progress, end will also show you how much processing time remains
          before finishing.
          When the sample has been stretched, the "in progress" message will be replaced by
          the soft key legends, and you can replay the stretched sample with the PLAY
          soft key. Pressing the ENT/PLAY. key will replay the original sample - not the stretched
          sample. If you are happy with the sound of the stretched sample, you can proceed to edit,
          trim and loop it, just as if it was a freshly-recorded sample.
      Re-sampling
         From the ED.2 or TIME page, press RATE in order to enter the re-sampling page. In this
         page, the existing samples are resampled at a lower rate in order to conserve memory
         space (or they can be sampled at a higher rate, though there's little practical use for
         this!).




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                             Page 47
Sampler functions


          First select the sample to be re-sampled using the DATA knob or the + / < and - / >
                 buttons. You cannot resample a sample to itself, so you must give the resampled
          data a new name, using the NAME button.
          Next, select the new rate at which resampling is to be done. The default value is one-half
          of the original sample rate, for example, a sample made at 44100Hz will have the default
          value set to 22050Hz. If you adjust this value, ("new sample rate"), the fields below this
          will change: the length of the new sample, together with the amount of memory space it
          will take up, and the amount by which the new sample will be detuned, relative to the old
          sample ("tune offset"). By simple mathematics, you can work out that if a sample is
          resampled at half the frequency of the original, but the original time of the sample is
          maintained, there will only be half as many sample points as before, and the overall pitch
          will be dropped by one octave.
          In addition to the new sampling frequency, a filter can be chosen to prevent aliasing or
          "glitching" in the new sample. There is a choice of four different filter types (Filter 1
          being the highest-frequency filter, and Filter 4 being the lowest frequency), in addition to
          an "autoF" facility, which lets the S1000 pick the most appropriate filter for the
          resampling being done.
          Two specially-configured soft keys, 3/4 a and 2/3 , allow you to resample at 0.75
          or 0.67 of the original sample rate. These will drop the pitch by 5 or 7 semitones
          respectively. Simply press either of these soft keys in order to perform resampling
          at these rates.
          If you are not using these pre-defined resampling rates, press GO. After a while, the
          "re-sampling in progress" message will disappear, and you can press the PLAY
          soft key to listen to the resampled sound (pressing ENT/PLAY will give you the original
          sound). If you are not happy with the new, resampled sound, you can alter the parameters
          and try again using the GO button. You can always overwrite existing samples (as with the
          JOIN and TIME facilities).
          Note that smooth looping points which were carefully selected prior to resampling may
          change, as critical sample points may disappear. If this occurs, reset the looping points
          (but moving them by only one or two sample points will generally put things right again).

      Conclusion
        This ends the tour of the facilities provided by the S1000 for editing samples. Though
        there's a comprehensive array of options, most of the facilities provided can be accessed
        and implemented using a little common-sense. As with any complex system, practice
        makes perfect. It's unrealistic to expect to get perfect results on your first try with the
        S1000. Sampling is more of an art than a science, and experience will refine your skills of
        recording and editing sampling. Remember to trust your ears - they're the ultimate test of
        whether something sounds good or not.




Page 48                                                                                            Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                             Sampler functions


  SELECT SAMPLE (S1000PB only)
        NOTE: This section applies to the S1000PB only. If you are using another model in the
        series, this section does not apply. Please resume reading at the "EDIT PROG" section,
        page ??.

      From any page, press the SELECT SAMLE button, and you are in a position to get information
      on, copy, delete or rename a sample. The first thing to do is to select a sample. Use the
      CURSOR buttons to make sure that the cursor is at the top right of the screen, and the
      DATA buttons to select a sample. Sample names are up to 12 characters long for a mono
      sample - and 10 characters for stereo (followed by the characters "-L" or -R", added by the
      S1000 at sample time.
       To enter a new sample name for copying or renaming, press NAME and use the other buttons
       to enter a name ENT/PLAY when done. A name such as "HUGHS SAMPLE" will mean nothing
       in a month's time, while "HUGHS BASS" will at least tell you what kind of instrument the
       sample refers to. Now use COPY or REN to copy or rename the existing sample to the name
       you've just entered. If the name already exists for a sample, the S1000PB will display this.
       To delete a sample, simply press the DEL button to delete the currently-selected sample. This
       operation cannot be undone, so make sure that you have a copy on disk if you want to use
       this sample at any time in the future,
       The "monitoring program" can be set to either MONITOR or a program name. This
       enables you choose what sound will be heard when you press ENT/PLAY button. Usually, you
       should set this to MONITOR.
       There are two soft keys which bring up other pages – PARA and LIST.

  PARA
    This page allows you to alter certain parameters of individual samples. The field where the
    sample is selected is, once again, at the top right of the screen. Use the DATA buttons to
    select the sample.
    The next parameter allows you to alter the original pitch at which the sample was recorded,
    so that when you replay it on the keyboard, it will come out at the correct pitch. Further fine
    tuning (in semitones and cents) can be done with the next parameter.
       The next parameter determines the way in which the sample will be played back. There are
       four options available here. Note that these settings depend on a loop point which has
       previously been set up on a S1000 which is capable of recording and editing samples.
       The first is LOOP IN RELEASE. This means that when a key is pressed, the sample will
       play through all the loops until the first HOLD loop is reached. When the key is released, the
       HOLD loop will continue to play as the release falls away.
       LOOP UNTIL RELEASE is slightly different. Again, the sample will play, with all loops,
       until the first HOLD loop is reached. However, when the key is released, the loop will end,
       and the remaining portion of the sample (if any) will be played. This is a useful setting for
       sounds which have a definite attack, an indefinite sustain period (set with the loop), and a
       -definite release characteristic.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 49
Sampler functions

     The next setting, NO LOOPING, does what its name suggests - it plays the sample through
     without loops for as long as the key is held down. As soon as the key is released, the sound
     will start to decay.
     PLAY TO SAMPLE END is useful for drum trigger units such as the ME-35T and the like.
     Like the previous setting, no loops are played, but an instantaneous trigger signal or key press
     will play the whole of the sample (the key does not have to be pressed for the whole length of
     the sample).
     The last parameter, "loop tune offset" allows you set a pitch shift for a HOLD loop by
     +50 cents (one semitone). This shift will only occur once on the first occurrence of the loop.
     Subsequent loops will be replayed at the shifted pitch of the first loop, ie this tuning offset is
     not an incremental process.

 LIST




     The LIST page does what its name implies - it provides a list of all samples in memory. In
     addition to the names of the samples, it also gives the size of each sample (in 16-bit words),
     the percentage of available memory currently used by the sample, and the sampling frequency
     at which the sample was recorded. Use the CURSOR buttons to scroll through the list. No
     data can be changed on this page.




Page 50                                                                                         Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                              Sampler functions


     EDIT PROG
       When you press the EDIT PROG button, you are now in the PROGRAM EDIT main page. This
       is where you set up the way in which the samples you have recorded, trimmed, looped, etc,
       will be replayed from a keyboard or other MIDI controller.




      You can set layer samples, create velocity splits, keyboard splits, and assign envelopes and
      filtering to the basic sounds. In some ways, you can treat this section as if the S1000 were a
      multi-timbral synthesizer module, except that the waveforms you use are not preset, but are
      digital samples.
      The first page of the EDIT PROG section allows you to change only one parameter - the
      program which is to be edited. However, you can use the NAME button to enter a new name
      and then copy or rename (COPY or REN) the program to this new name. You can also delete the
      selected program (DEL ). Once you have selected the program you will be working on, the
      next stage is to edit the keygroups (KGRP).
      Keygroups
           As explained in the Glossary, keygroups are the way in which samples are combined and
           parameters assigned so that they can be played from a keyboard. When you press the
           KGRP button from the initial EDIT PROG page, the KEYGROUPS page will be
           displayed.
          Up to 99 keygroups can be assigned to a program. The first parameter on this page
          allows you to decide which keygroup will be edited. This number cannot, of course, be
          greater than the number of keygroups which are currently assigned to the program. This
          number is displayed directly below the number of the keygroup to be edited.
          Another way to select a keygroup for editing is to press and hold down the EDIT PROG
           button. While holding down the button, press the key on the MIDI keyboard which will
           play the keygroup you want to edit. This will automatically select the keygroup. If the
           key plays more than one keygroup, the first keygroup will be selected, and successive
           presses of the key will cycle through all appropriate keygroups. This method of holding
           down the EDIT PROG button and pressing a key works for all sub-pages in the
           KEYGROUP page.
           NOTE -This number ("change number of KEYGROUPS") can be changed, but only by
           using the + / < and - / > buttons, not by using the DATA knob or the number pad.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 51
Sampler functions

          To save you work when editing a program with a large number of keygroups, the next
          parameter allows you to specify whether editing changes to the keygroups will take place
          over all keygroups, or just the one which has been selected. If you choose ALL in a
          mufti-sample program, it is then relatively easy to go back and "fine-tune" individual
          keygroups.
          The "overlapping group CROSSFADE" parameter may be set ON or OFF. If ON, then
          any keygroups whose keyspans overlap will automatically be crossfaded at the overlap
          points, giving a smoother sound for multisampled programs.




             In this multi-sample program, there is no keyboard crossfading, so there
                       may be audible jumps' between samples.




               In this mufti-sample program, keyboard crossfading has been implemented.
                  The gray triangles represent areas of crossfading, where two samples
                       overlap, and a smoother transition is achieved at these points.


          The last parameter on this page "note-on sample COHERENCE" requires a little
          explanation. When the sampler portion of the S1000 receives information from an external
          MIDI source which requires it to play a number of samples simultaneously, a finite
          amount of time is taken to perform the calculations necessary to play each sound. When
          playing a note which plays a number of percussive samples, it is possible that you may
          hear a slight "staggering" of the notes in the chord. To avoid this, set this COHERENCE
          parameter to ON. In that way, the S1000 will wait until the data for all notes in the chord
          is ready, and then play all notes simultaneously. There may be a slight processing lag, but
          in the normal run of events, this should be unnoticeable. Your sequencer may allow you to
          correct the timing, in any case. It is suggested that you use this parameter to ON when
          using stereo samples, or velocity or keygroup crossfading.




Page 52                                                                                   Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                         Sampler functions

     SPAN




          The SPAN button allows you to set the keyspan of any keygroups in the program. On the
          left of this page are up to four diagrams of a keyboard with a keyspan underneath the
          keyboard (represented by a horizontal bar), and to the right of this are displayed the
          corresponding keygroups with their HIGH and LOW ranges. These may be displayed
          either as MIDI note numbers or as note names. Press SPAN once again to toggle between
          note names and numbers. You can then select the keygroup number you want (place the
          cursor on a field in the KG column, and use the DATA knob to select the keygroup)
          before altering the HIGH and LOW limits of the keygroup. Note that if you are editing
          using the note names, placing the cursor over the whole note name will alter the value by
          an octave for each click of the DATA knob. Alternatively, place the cursor on the "LOW"
          field of the first keyspan and play the appropriate key on the MIDI keyboard. The cursor
          will move to the next note value field (the high value of the same keyspan, of the low
          value of the next), ready for you to play the next note.
           In this page, you can also alter the tuning (TUNE) of the samples played in this keyspan
           in semitones and cents (useful if you have a split keyboard setup, and you want each half
           of the split to sound at the correct pitch).
           The other parameter in this page is BEAT, which is used to create a fixed offset to the
           original pitch. Unlike the TUNE parameter, this tuning offset is constant, no matter what
           the played pitch of the sample. You may like to use this to create a "chorus" effect, by
           adding a small amount of fixed offset to one of two otherwise identical samples.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 53
Sampler functions


     FILTER
        The FILTER page (FILT) allows you to apply a 18dB/octave low-pass filter to modify the
        sound of samples within a keygroup. Essentially, the parameters on this page are what
        you would expect to find on an analog synthesizer (though the S1000's filter is digital).
        The top line of the page allows you to select the keygroup number and ALL/ONE, or to
        alter the program which is currently being edited.




          The next line allows you to adjust the cutoff frequency of the filter. At its highest value
          (99), the filter lets all the sound through, and at its lowest, (00) no sound passes through.
          Unlike the filters on some synthesizers, however, there is no resonance control, and the
          filter cannot go into self-oscillation.
          The next parameter, "key follow", sets the amount (from-24to 24)by which the position
          of the key played will affect the cutoff frequency of the filter. When this is set to a
          positive value, the higher the key played, the brighter the sound (negative values reverse
          this effect). This parameter sets the amount of this tracking. This can be used to simulate
          the effect of natural acoustic instruments.
          "velocity > freq" allows you to affect the cutoff frequency, depending on the velocity
          with which a key is pressed. The value can be set from values of +99 to -99. A positive
          value will make the sound brighter, the faster the key is depressed, and a negative value
          will make the sound duller, when the key is pressed faster.
          The next parameter, "pressure > freq", allows the cutoff frequency of the filter to be
          altered by the amount of aftertouch (Channel Pressure). Again, this value is variable from
          +50 to -50, and positive values will increase the brightness of the sound when aftertouch
          is applied; negative values will make the sound duller.
          "envelope-2 > freq" determines the effect of the second ADSR envelope generator on
          the frequency of the filter. Variable from +50 to -50, a positive value will produce a
          "wah" effect, and a negative value will produce an "inverted wah".
          At the bottom of the page are two parameters which are not strictly related to the filter, but
          are related to the control parameters transmitted from the keyboard and the way in which
          they affect the sound of the keygroup. The first is "vel> loud offset" (+50 to -50).
          This controls the overall volume of the keygroup as determined by the velocity of the key
          pressed, and is an offset added to (or subtracted from) individual sample levels. Positive
          values will make the keygroup louder the faster the key is depressed. Negative values will
          have the opposite effect.




                                                                                       Version 2.0 89/11
Page 54
                                                                            Sampler functions

          "env-2 >pitch" allows the pitch of the samples in this keygroup to be altered
          according to the values of the second ADSR envelope (+50 to -50). A positive value will
          make the pitch rise with the attack, fall with the decay, etc, and a negative value will do
          the reverse.
      ENV-1
        Pressing the ENV-1 button will bring up this page. Here you can set various parameters
        relating to volume. The first line allows you to pick the keygroup, ALL/ONE and the
        program to be edited.




          The next parameters above the graphic representation of the envelope shape allow you to
          alter the attack rate, delay rate, sustain level and release rate of this envelope. As you
          change the values, the shape of the envelope will change correspondingly. As the legend
          in the top left of this page shows, this envelope controls the volume of the samples in
          this keygroup.
          Once the basic envelope has been set up, other factors can be used to affect the speed of
          the envelope. These are all on the right of the graphic envelope. The first, "vel.> Att", is
          variable from +50 to -50, and determines the amount by which the attack speed will be
          changed depending on the Note On velocity. A positive value will increase the attack
          time if the key is pressed fast, while a negative value will slow down the attack rate if the
          key is pressed fast. This parameter is useful for imitating the characteristics of some
          acoustic instruments (for instance, most wind instruments have a faster attack rate when
          played loudly).
          The next parameter, "vel. > Rel" is used to vary the release rate relative to the Note
          On velocity value (+50 to -50). Again, a positive value will increase the release rate
          relative to the Note On velocity, and a negative value will shorten the release time.
          However, the parameter below this, "off vel.> Rel" (+50 to -50) is possibly
          more relevant to natural-sounding playing. The MIDI specification allows for Note Off
          velocity as well as Note On velocity. Though many keyboards do not accept or transmit
          this, assuming a mean value of 64, all AKAI keyboards provide a full implementation of
          this function. The speed with which the key is released can be used here to affect the
          release rate (positive values mean that a fast release lengthens the release rate, and vice
          versa). This allows more expressiveness and realism, but demands a slight relearning of
          keyboard technique (similar to an acoustic piano).




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                               Page 55
Sampler functions

          The "key >DEC&REL" parameter (+50 to -50) allows you to control the amount by which
          the key position affects the decay and release rates. Setting this to a negative value means
          that the higher the note played on the keyboard, the shorter the decay and release times
          (similar to most acoustic instruments). Setting this to a positive number will reverse this
          effect.
          The final parameter on this page, "attack hold" can be set to ON or OFF. When ON,
          the attack portion of the envelope will be held until looping begins, and when OFF, the
          envelope will continue along the set values, regardless of loop settings.
     ENV2
          The second ADSR. envelope is used primarily, but not exclusively, for altering the cutoff
          frequency of the low-pass filter dynamically. It can also be used for altering the pitch of
          the sound (set in the FILTER, page, above). All the parameters here are identical to the
          ones set in the ENVl page, with the exception of the last: "vel.>env.out"




          This parameter (+50 to -50) determines the absolute amplitude of the envelope relative to
          the velocity of the key. When this is set to a positive value, a higher key velocity will
          produce a higher attack level, etc (the rate will be unaffected). Setting this to a negative
          value will have the reverse effect.
      Choosing the samples for a keygroup
        The last three pages, SMP1, SMP2 and SMP3 all refer to the samples which will be included in
        a keygroup. The last page, SMP3, is only accessible from the second sample page.

      SMP1




Page 56                                                                               Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                            Sampler functions

         Pressing the SMP1 button will bring up the samples to be included in a keygroup. As with
         other pages in the EDIT PROG mode, the top line of the page allows you to specify the
         keygroup number, ONE/ALL or the name of the program being edited. Additionally, the
         first line also allows you to specify the keyspan of this sample. Up to four samples can
         be allocated to each keygroup (if you feel you want more, create more keygroups for the
         program, overlapping each other).
          Within a keygroup, these four samples can be set to play at different velocities. The tonal
          characteristics of acoustic instruments can vary radically from loud to soft (a classic
          example of an instrument which does this is the Japanese end-blown flute, the shakuhachi),
          and so you may want to take a few samples of the same instrument being played at
          different volumes, as well as different pitches. Alternatively, you may wish to
          incorporate a velocity switch as a special effect a keygroup could be set to produce only
          the sound of a string section when played softly, but change to or add the sound of a
          brass section when played at a higher velocity.




          The neat parameter is "xfd" (crossfade) which may be either ON or OFF. If ON, any note
          which has a velocity which falls within two velocity zones will play both samples, the
          relative volume being adjusted accordingly.
          To select a sample to include in a keygroup, move the cursor to the sample field and
          select a sample. If the sample has been previously selected as part of an existing
          program, but has not yet been loaded into memory, a question mark will be shown by the
          sample name. Note that a SINE "sample" is given as a default for a new program.
           On some of the supplied program disks, the "samples" SINE, SQUARE, SAWTOOTH
           and PULSE are included. This enables you to create "synthesizer" sounds by adding
           these regular waveforms to sampled sounds.
           Next, select the "velocity window" within which the sample will be played. MIDI Note
           On velocity values can be from 0 (ppp) to 127 (fff), so if you want the sample to be
           played all the time, set "v-lo" to 0, and "v-hi" to 127. Otherwise, set the velocity
           windows accordingly.
           There is-one other parameter for each keygroup - the CONST/TRACK parameter. When
           set to "TRACK", the keyboard will produce pitched notes corresponding to the key being
           struck. If set to "CONST", however, the pitch of the sample will




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                             Page 57
Sampler functions


          remain at the constant pitch of the edited sample, no matter what key is pressed, This can
          be useful if you want to add a constant pitch percussion sound to a pitched instrument, for
          instance.

     The second sample page lSMP2)
       In the second sample page, (SMP2), you can set further parameters relating to each sample
       in a keygroup. The top line allows you to set the keyspan of the keygroup, the keygroup
       to be edited, the ALL/ONE parameter and the program currently being edited. Each of
       the other parameters in this page can be applied to each velocity zone (sample)
       individually.




          The "sem.cnt" parameter allows you to set the relative tuning of each sample within a
          keygroup (in semitones and cents).
          The "loud" parameter allows you to adjust the relative volume of each sample in a
          keygroup relative to the other samples. This value can be set from -50 to +50.
          "filt" allows you to specify the cutoff frequency of the low-pass filter for each sample
          relative to the other samples in the keygroup.
          When a program is being played through the stereo outputs, the stereo position of each
          sample in a keygroup can be set using the "pan" parameter. The values here can range
          from L50 (panned hard left) through MID (the signal is sent equally to the left and right
          channels) to R50 (panned hard right).
          The "out" parameter requires a little explanation. If a program is assigned to be played
          through one of the eight individual output channels, an "offset" can be added to each
          sample in the program which is added to the basic output channel to determine the output
          channel from which the sample will eventually be output. For example, if a program is
          assigned to be played through channel 3, and four sample "out"s are set in this page to be
          0, +1, +1 and +2, these samples will be played through channels 3, 4, 4 and 5 respectively.
          If value of the basic output channel added to the offset here goes above 8, the number
          "wraps round". In this way, if the basic out channel is 6, and the offset value set here is 6,
          the total is 12. This will be automatically changed to 4 (12 - 8).
           The last parameter on this page allows you to set up the way the sample is to be played
           back, overriding the settings made in the ED.2 page of the EDIT SAMPLE mode, if you
           want. There are five values which are allowed. AS SAMPLE plays back the sample
           exactly as set up in the ED.2 page (loops included). LP in R is the same as the LOOP IN
           RELEASE mode of the ED.2 page, and "LP til R" is the same as LOOP UNTIL
           RELEASE. NO LOOPS is self-explanatory, and TO END




Page 58                                                                                Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                         Sampler functions

         is the same as the ED.2 PLAY TO SAMPLE END. The ability to reset the playback:
         parameters of a sample allows you a lot of flexibility - the same sample can be used in
         different ways in different programs.
      The third sample page (SMP3)




          This page is only accessible from the SMP2 page (press SMP3), and has only one
          parameter, which allows you to determine the way in which velocity affects the playback
          starting point for each sample in a keygroup. This figure is variable from +9999 to
          -9999. The higher the positive number, the earlier in the sample playback will start
          relative to the key velocity (ie, a high key velocity will start playback earlier in the
          sample). A negative number has the opposite effect (a high key velocity will start
          playback later in the sample than a low key velocity). This effect is particularly useful
          for simulating percussion instruments (try it with a bass drum).
      MIDI in the EDIT PROG mode
        To enter the MIDI page in the EDIT PROG mode, press SLCT to get to the opening EDIT
        PROG page, and then press the MIDI button. The top line of this page contains a field
        which allows you to change the sample currently being edited.




          The next field allows you to set the program number of the program. This is the number
          which will be called up on receipt of a MIDI Program Change message, and corresponds
          to a patch number on a synthesizer. Unlike a synthesizer, though, the S1000 allows
          different programs to share a patch number, so when a Program Change message is
          received, all programs with the corresponding number will be selected simultaneously.
          The next parameter allows you to change the MIDI channel on which this program will
          receive information (OMN, 1-16).




Version 2.089/ 11                                                                           Page 59
Sampler functions

          NOTE that the channel on which Program Change information is received may be
          selected in the MIDI mode to be OMNI or any other channel, so that program changes
          can be made independently of this MIDI channel setting.
          The S1000 is capable of playing up to sixteen notes (samples) at one time. If a keygroup
          is set to use four samples which will all be played when one key is pressed, then only four
          notes of that keygroup can be played simultaneously. If it only uses one sample, then 16
          notes of this keygroup can be played at one time. Remember that velocity crossfading
          may use two samples simultaneously from one key, which will reduce the polyphony of
          the program using this feature. The neat parameter, "polyphony", allows you to select how
          many notes (1 to 16) can be played at a time by this particular program. If the program
          allows a large number of notes to be played, but other programs are playing other notes,
          more notes may be "stolen" from this program or from the other programs (see the
          "PRIORITY" parameter below).
          The "PRIORITY" parameter allows you to specify how notes will be "stolen" by other
          programs if this is necessary. There are four settings: LOW, NORM, HIGH and HOLD. If
          a program is set to LOW priority, then notes from this program will be "stolen" first. If set
          to HIGH, then notes from other programs with lower priority will be "stolen" before they
          are stolen for this program. NORM is, of course, normal priority. If you are playing a
          complex piece of music using many programs, it is a good idea to set important,
          "lead-line" programs to HIGH, and less important background programs to LOW. HOLD
          is a special priority. If a program's priority is set to HOLD, notes from this program can
          only be "stolen" by the same program.
           The notes which will be "stolen" are determined by the "reassignment" parameter -
           either the OLDEST note will stop playing, or the QUIETEST one.
           The keyboard range is the next parameter on this page, and setting here will override any
           keygroup range settings made in the keygroup SPAN page. Remember that pressing the
           soft MIDI button will redisplay this page, toggling between MIDI note numbers and note
           names.
          Finally, on this page, the pitch of the program can be shifted by +2 octaves (which allows
          you to adjust for the actual playing position on the keyboard).

      OUT
        By pressing the OUT button from the main EDIT PROG, the EDIT PROG MIDI or EDIT
        PROG PTCH page, you can control the audio output of the program from the S1000. The
        first line of this page allows you to choose the program whose OUT parameters are to be
        edited.




                                                                                      Version 2.0 89/11
Page 60
                                                                          Sampler functions




          The next parameter allows you to set the overall volume of the program (00 to 99)
          relative to any other programs being played.
          The three parameters following affect the volume of the sound as controlled by three
          keyboard parameters: velocity, key position, and aftertouch (pressure).
          The first, "vel>loud", can take values from +50 to -50. If this value is positive, the
          higher the velocity, the louder the sound produced, and a negative value will produce a
          quieter sound with a high key velocity. Setting two programs in the same keyrange, one
          with this value set positive, and one with it set negative, can prcduce a velocity
          cross-fading effect.
          The next parameter, “key> loud", determines the volume of the sound depending on
          the key being played. When this parameter is positive, the higher the key, the louder the
          sound, and when negative, the higher the key, the quieter the sound (like most acoustic
          instruments).
          Finally, in this column, "prs>loud" allows you to specify the effect of aftertouch on
          program volume. Positive values will increase the volume as aftertouch is applied, and
          negative numbers will reduce the volume when aftertouch is applied.
          "mono out" specifies the output channel (OFF or 1 to 8) from which the program is
          played. Note that this setting interacts with the "out" parameter in the SMP2 page of the
          keygroup setting, and is used as the "base" number to which offsets set up in the SMP2
          page are added. If this value is set to OFF, then the program will only be output from the
          stereo connectors.
          As mentioned in the guide to the rear panel, programs can be sent through the S1000's
          own effects loop prior to output. The "efct out." parameter can be set ON or OFF
          individually for each program. If you are playing a large number of programs
          simultaneously, then you might consider using the EFFECT OUT as an extra individual
          output channel.
           The "ster. 1ev" parameter allows you to set the level of the program from the stereo
           outputs. It has no effect on the level from individual outputs. This parameter interacts
           with all other volume settings you have made for this program, notably the "loudness"
           parameter. If the loudness parameter is set to 00, no sound will be produced from the
           stereo outputs, even if the "ster .1ev" parameter is set to 99.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                           Page 61
Sampler functions


          "ster . pan" controls the overall pan position of the program in the stereo image,
          interacting with the individual pan settings in the SMP2 page. This parameter can take
          values from L50 through MID to R50. Of course, this parameter will have no effect on
          the output from individual outputs.
          The last parameter in this column, "keys pan" can be used to create a pseudo-stereo
          sample from a mono sample. It can take values from +50 to -50. When set to positive
          values, the higher the key being played, the further to the right the program will be placed
          in the stereo image. Negative values will reverse this effect. Useful, perhaps, for a piano
          sample, to give the illusion of "keyboard spread" between the speakers or to spread a
          single tom sample played on a range of keys across the image. This parameter has no
          effect on the output from the individual outputs.
          The last column of this page is concerned exclusively with the control of the pan position
          of the program from the stereo outputs. The first three parameters control an LFO which is
          used for autopanning. The "speed" and "depth" parameters (both 00 to 99) do exactly
          what you'd expect: the "depth" parameter providing the greatest amount of panning when
          set to high values, and the "delay" parameter is used to set the delay time between the key
          being pressed and the LFO taking full effect.
          The last parameter on this page, "modwhl", allows you to use a modulation wheel or any
          controller which has been assigned the MIDI controller number 1 to affect the pan
          position of the sound. Setting this to a positive value will start the sound in the left half of
          the image, and moving the modulation wheel will send it to the right. A negative value
          will have the opposite effect. Try setting up two identical programs, but with this
          parameter positive on one and negative on the other. Moving the modulation wheel will
          produce some interesting effects!

     Pitch
        The PTCH button will bring up the PITCH and MOD page, allowing you to specify the
        parameters for a pitch modulation LFO, the amount by which the depth of this LFO can be
        increased by keyboard parameters, and parameters affecting pitchbend. In addition, the
        overall tuning of the program and synchronization of the LFOs can be set here.




           The pitch modulation LFO has three parameters - "speed", "depth" and "delay", which
           work as you would expect on a synthesizer LFO. The "delay" parameter specifies the
           time from the key press to the LFO taking full effect. The "key" parameters vary the
           amount of LFO parameter applied, depending on the key position (positive numbers
           increase the values for high keys).




Page 62                                                                                  Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                           Sampler functions

         The depth of the pitch modulation LFO can be affected by three real-time performance
         parameters: the modulation wheel ("modwheel"), the aftertouch ("pressure") applied
         to the keyboard, and the speed ("velocity") with which. the key is hit. All these
         parameters can take values from 00 to 99 - the higher the number, the greater the depth
         of the pitch modulation LFO when these performance parameters increase.
         The amount of pitchbend (in semitones) that can be effected using the pitch bend wheel
         is set by the "bendwheel" parameter. If set to 0 (minimum), no pitchbend will take
         place when the wheel is moved. The maximum value is 12 (one octave) up or down
         from the center position when the pitch bend wheel is moved appropriately.
         Aftertouch ("pressure") can also be used to affect the pitch of the program. This
         parameter is variable from +12 to -12 (semitones). When set to positive values, the pitch
         will increase as aftertouch is applied (to a maximum of +12 semitones - one octave). If
         this is a negative value, the pitch will decrease as aftertouch is applied (to a maximum of
         -12 semitones - one octave).
          The "tuning" parameter allows final adjustment of the program's pitch by t50
          semitones in semitone/cent steps.
          Finally, the "LFO desync" parameter when ON, sets all the pitch modulation LFOs for
          different notes to a slightly different frequency. This mimics the effect of (say) a string
          ensemble, where each player produces vibrato at a slightly different rate from the other
          players. When OFF, each LFO will be set to the same frequency.

      Conclusion
        As you can see, setting up programs on the S1000 is not radically different from setting
        up patches on a multi-timbral synthesizer. The same principles of envelope shape, filter
        and LFOs apply to both. The main difference is that you start with sampled waveforms,
        rather than generated or prerecorded PCM waveforms, giving you an almost infinite
        flexibility in the sounds you can create.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                             Page 63
MIDI


3 MIDI
   The MIDI mode allows you to setup various parameters relating to the S1000. Of course, MIDI
receive channels, etc, can be set up from the EDIT PROG mode, but this mode gives you control
over some more "global" parameters.
  BASIC MIDI
     When you first press the MIDI button, the BASIC MIDI CHANNEL CONTROL page is
     entered. This selects a number of parameters which affect the MIDI response of the whole
     instrument.




      The first parameter is the "program select enable" parameter. This can be set ON or
      OFF to enable or disable Program Change commands. Disabling Program Change commands
      can be important when controlling the S1000 from an external sequencer, as it will stop
      nonexistent programs being selected accidentally, with the resulting embarrassing periods of
      silence.
      However, if you decide to enable Program Change, the next parameter allows you to specify
      the MIDI channel on which the S1000 will accept these messages. Note that S1000 starts
      numbering its programs at 01, as opposed to some MIDI devices, whose programs start at 00.
      You can override the Program Change channel by switching the Program Change OMNI to
      ON. This does not mean that notes will be received and played on any channel, but only
      Program Change messages.
       The currently selected program number is displayed and may be changed underneath this.
       Remember that a program number on the S1000 does not mean that a single program has
       been selected - instead it means that all programs with that number are selected.
       Finally, the "OMNI override for play input" does what its name implies -playing data
       (Note On/Off, etc) will be accepted from any MIDI channel, which means that when you are
       testing and editing a program, you don't have to worry about setting the keyboard or any
       MIDI source to the right channel number. Of course, when performing from a keyboard
       and/or a sequencer (using a MIDI merge), you can turn this off to take full advantage of the
       multi-timbral capability of the S1000.




 Page 64                                                                           Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                   MIDI


  FILT
     This is another filter, but this one has no effect on the sound. Instead, it filters out specific
     MIDI information. When you enter this page, the cursor will be at the top left of a grid of
     "+" signs, in a long rectangular box. As you turn the CURSOR knob, the cursor will move to
     the right and then go down a line.




       In this grid, the columns represent MIDI channels (1-16), and the rows represent MIDI
       information which the S1000 will accept or filter. The first row, "ON", affects the S1000's
       receive capabilities for all information on that channel, the next, "WHLS", refers to the pitch
       and modulation wheels, the third ("PRES") refers to aftertouch, and the last, "LOUD", refers to
       an external MIDI volume control (controller ?). The last column in each row, "all", will
       affect the appropriate information for all MIDI channels. "+" signs mean that the S1000
       accepts this information, "-" mean that this information is filtered out.
       If you turn the DATA knob counterclockwise, the "+" which the cursor covers will change to
       a "-". If you make this change on the top row, all "+" signs underneath will change to a "-",
       and if you make this change in the "all" column, the parameter for all MIDI channels will
       be changed. The top right corner of the display ("ON"/"all") is a special case - all
       parameters will be changed.
       By using this filter, you can control the response of the S1000 to MIDI events. By filtering
       out aftertouch on a percussion program where it is not needed, for instance, you can improve
       the response of the S1000 when a lot of MIDI data is received.

   PPMs




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                              Page 65
          MIDI

          This page (accessed with the PPMs button), has no parameters. Instead, it provides a real-time
          display of all Note On information received on the 16 MIDI channels. The higher the bar on
          the display, the greater the velocity of the received note. This page is called "PPMs" because
          it simulates the behavior of audio bar-graph Peak Program Meters.

   Receive Monitor
     In this page (press RCVE), you can monitor the MIDI information received by the S1000.
     This is especially useful if you are faultfinding on your MIDI system - you're convinced that
     you're transmitting note information on a certain channel, but the S1000 isn't responding.
     Information from the MIDI IN is displayed, and a channel filter may be set at the top of the
     screen (OMNI or 1 to 16).




     If the information is not displayed on this monitor, the information is not reaching the S1000.
     Check your connections or the output channel of the transmitting equipment. If the
     information appears to be correct, but no sound or unexpected sounds are being produced,
     then the fault may lie in the MIDI setting of the program(s). You may discover that the piano
     track of the sequencer is playing the drum samples, for example.


  TRAN




      In this page, you can produce a test transmission of a MIDI note, and set the channel, key and
      velocity of the note to be transmitted, using the "SEND" ON and OFF buttons. This key value and
      velocity will also be used by the ENT/PLAY key when testing samples and programs. - .




Page 66                                                                                 Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                   MIDI


 MIDI data dumps
   Samples can be transferred between the S1000 and other samplers via MIDI. If you do this,
   you must make a MIDI loop (MIDI OUT of the S1000 connected to MIDI IN of the other
   sampler, and vice versa). This is necessary because of the way in which MIDI sample
   dumps are performed (in computer terms, a handshake protocol with error
   detection/correction).
   Though the S1000 is a 16-bit sampler, it can accept samples from other samplers, including
   those from other manufacturers which use a lower bit resolution, padding low bits with
   zeroes. If transmitting to another sampler which uses fewer bits, it simply truncates the low
   bits. Instead of another sampler, samples can be transmitted to and accepted from other
   devices (such as computers) which are capable of storing and/or editing sample data.
   However, in this section we will always refer to the other device as a "sampler".




      The first parameter, "channel", does not refer to a MIDI channel, but a "logical channel"
      used in System Exclusive protocol. Both samplers must be set to the same channel for
      transfer to take place.
      The "type of transmission" refers to what will actually be transmitted over MIDI. This
      can be ALL PROGRAMS, ALL SAMPLES, SINGLE PROGRAM, SINGLE SAMPLE, and
      DRUM SETTINGS. The meanings of these values are self-explanatory.
      Two protocols for sample transfer are available, "STANDARD", which conforms to the MIDI
      sample dump standard, and "S1000", which is a superset of the MIDI sample dump standard.
      Use the "S1000" setting only if you are transferring data between two S1000-compatible
      machines (this includes the S1000, S1000KB, S1000HD, and the S1000PB).
       If you have selected SINGLE PROGRAM transmission, the next parameter, "single
       program", allows you to specify the program which will be transmitted.
       If you have selected SINGLE SAMPLE transmission, the next parameter, "single
       sample", allows you to specify the sample which will be transmitted.
       You can override the default sample number (based on the order in which samples appear in
       the S1000's memory) with the last parameter, "sample number override".
      When all the parameters are set up, press the SEND button to initiate transmission. Once the
      handshake protocol has been successfully initiated between the two devices, data transfer
      will take place. A new soft key, ABORT, will appear. Press this if you want to terminate the
      transmission prematurely.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                          Page 67
     MIDI

     There is no receive key, as reception of bulk data will automatically take place once a remote
     device initiates the dump protocol

 SCSI




     This only applies if you have a S1000 fitted with the SCSI interface board (IB-103). On this
     page you can enable or disable MIDI bulk data transmission along a SCSI bus, rather than the
     MIDI connections, and set the SCSI IDs for both the S1000 and the other SCSI device. The
     other SCSI device can be another of the S1000 series or a personal computer (equipped with
     the appropriate software). Values for SCSI device IDs can be from 0 to 7. The two values
     must be different, otherwise no communication will take place.

  KBD
    This page exists, but serves no function on the S1000 series. Since the S1000KB uses the
    same operating system software, this page is available only for use with a S1000KB.




                                                                                    Version 2.0 89/11
Page 68
                                                                                 Disk operations


4 Disk operations
    The DISK button allows you to perform a number of disk-related operations, over and above
those which you can perform from the SELECT PROG mode.
   Loading from disk
      The S1000 allows you to load samples, programs, programs together with their associated
      samples, drum settings and operating systems from disk. This flexibility helps you pick and
      choose the sounds you need for a session or performance with the minimum of trouble.




       After inserting a disk with data on it, press the DISK button (if you haven't inserted a disk, the
       screen will display "! ! No DISK ! ! "). A diskette can only contain one volume, and
       may be formatted as high or low density. If the density (high or low) is different from the
       density of the last disk inserted, the S1000 will try an alternative density. The density of the
       disk currently inserted will be displayed as "FLOPPYH" or "FLQPPYL" at the top of the
       screen.
       If you have a hard disk fitted, you can select "HARD" at the top of the screen. Hard disks can
       be divided into partitions (see the section on formatting - "FORM" for full details of how
       partitions are arranged), and the partition letter can be selected following the selection of
       "HARD". Note that there will be a slight delay after choosing a partition, while the partition
       is selected and read by the S1000. A partition on a hard disk can contain up to 128 volumes,
       and you can select the volume from which you want to load data in the next parameter field.
       A list of all files (programs, samples and drum settings) will be displayed on the right side of
       the gage. Programs have a "p" beside their name, samples have an "S", and drum input
       settings have a "D". Beside the type of file on the disk, there is also a percentage number,
       which gives the amount of space that this file will take when loaded into memory.
       If you insert a diskette containing S900 samples and programs, the 12-bit S900 samples will
       have a "9" beside them, and the S900 programs will have a "*". The bottom line of the
       S1000 display will also inform you that the diskette is a diskette for the S900, which is to be
       used for reading only.
       If you cannot see the file you want to load, move the cursor to the list of files and scroll up
       and down to display all the files on the disk. If the file you want is not on the disk, insert
       another disk and press LOAD to re-read the disk. If you have a hard disk fitted, then you can
       choose another volume to read. When you know that you have the right disk or volume, you
       can proceed.




 Version 2.0 89/11                                                                               Page 69
   Disk operations

          The parameter under the "type of load:-" message can take a number of values. These are
          described below. When you have selected the appropriate value, you can press CLR or GO. CLR
          will delete all programs and samples from memory, and then load the chosen file(s) from
          disk.
      GO will try to load the chosen file(s) into memory without deleting anything first. It is possible
      that the chosen file(s) will occupy more memory space than is actually available, in which
      case the loading process will be halted. Any files which have been completely loaded into
      Memory prior to the "out of memory" message will remain in memory, however.
      Even if a file exists in memory with the same name as a file on disk, the disk file will still be
      loaded.
      ENTIRE VOLUME
          This will load the entire contents of the disk into the memory (programs, samples, drum
          settings and operating system).

      ALL PROGS+SAMPLES
             As the name suggests, all programs and samples on the disk will be loaded into
             memory. Any other files will not be loaded (drum settings, operating system, etc).

          ALL PROGRAMS ONLY
             Only programs (those files marked with a "P" in the display) will be loaded.

          ALL SAMPLES
             All samples (files marked with an "S" in the display) will be loaded.

          CURSOR PROG+SAMPS
             After selecting this parameter, move the cursor to a program file, and press GO or CLR. The
             selected program will be loaded, and then the S1000 will examine the program to see
             what samples are used by the program. These samples will then automatically be loaded.

          CURSOR ITEM ONLY
             After selecting this parameter, move the cursor to any file (program, sample or drum
             setting), and press GO or CLR. The highlighted file will then be loaded into memory.

          OPERATING SYSTEM
              If the disk contains an operating system, you can load the system from disk. Usually,
              however, if you follow our recommendation, you will have booted up the S1000 with the
              latest version of the operating system.

          S900 samples and programs
              No special command is provided for S900 samples. Simply select "ENTIRE
              VOLUME", "ALL PROGRAMS ONLY", "ALL SAMPLES", "CURSOR PROG+SAMPS" or
              "CURSOR ITEM ONLY" and proceed as above. The S1000 display will inform you when a
              sample for the S900 is being read, and after each S900 sample has been successfully read,
              an additional message, "unscrambling S900 sample" will appear, as the S1000 coverts
              A S900 to S1000 format (12-bit to 16-bit).




Page 70                                                                                 Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                          Disk operations


     Auto-loading
        If you turn on the S1000 with a diskette in the drive, the contents of the disk will be
        loaded into memory. If the disk contains a copy of the operating system, and this
        operating system is a higher version number than the ROM version, this will be loaded.
        If a hard disk is fitted, and the operating system is loaded on the first volume, the
        operating system will be automatically loaded from this, if it is a higher version than the
        ROM version, and no diskette is in the drive at power-on.
          We strongly recommend that you make a copy of any Operating System diskettes for
          your 51000 and always turn on the S1000 with the copy (not the original) inserted in the
          drive.
          If you have not made a copy of the operating system, DO SO NOW!, following the
          instructions in the first section of this manual.
          Further updates to the operating system may become available. We suggest that you
          keep in touch with your AKAI Professional dealer to find out when these updates are
          available and what benefits you will get from them.

 Saving to disk

   REMEMBER! When you turn off the S1000, all samples, programs and drum settings are
     lost. Save your work to disk if you want to keep it for another session.

      By pressing the SAVE button from the main DISK page, you can save your edited programs
      and samples to disk. Make sure that you have enough unprotected formatted disks available
      before you press SAVE.




      The process of saving to disk is much the same as loading from disk. There are two major
      differences, however.
      1) Disk space is measured in blocks - not percentage free space. One formatted MF2DD disk
      contains 796 blocks, and one MF2HD disk contains 1595 blocks.
      2) The unexpanded S1000 is capable of holding more data than will fit onto a single
      MF2DD or MF2HD diskette. If you try to save an entire volume with many programs and
      samples, you will have to use more than one disk.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 71
  Disk operations

     3) Disk volumes have a limit to the number of files which may be stored on them (samples,
     programs, drum settings, etc). It is unlikely that you. will exceed this limit (64 files), but it is
     possible (for instance, a Latin percussion setup may use many samples, and have many
     different multi-timbral programs associated with it). Be aware of this limit when creating
     complex setups.
     When you first press SAVE, all programs, samples and drum settings in memory are displayed
     on screen, together with the amount of space in blocks that they will take up on disk. Select
     the option to save: ENTIRE VOLUME, ALL PROGS+SAMPLES, ALL PROGRAMS ONLY,
     ALL SAMPLES, CURSOR PROG+SAMPS, CURSOR ITEM ONLY, or OPERATING SYSTEM in
     the same way as for loading.
     If you choose one of the "CURSOR" items, move the cursor to the sample or program in
     memory that you want to save. Saving "CURSOR PROG+SAMPS" will automatically save
     any samples associated with the highlighted program. If the samples already exist on disk
     with the same name, they will be overwritten. Be careful if you are using samples which have
     been slightly modified between programs; give them different names to avoid overwriting
     what may represent hours of work.
      If you want to check the files already on disk, you can press LOAD to view files on disk and
      then return to SAVE.
      When you have made your selection press WIPE or GO to save your work. WIPE will erase all
      data already on the disk, and save the selected file(s), and GO will simply save the files in
      addition to any already on disk. If you are saving to diskette, and there are more files to be
      saved than will fit on a single diskette, you will be prompted to insert a new diskette.
      Saving to hard disk follows the same procedure as saving to diskette. Note that if the hard
      disk is divided into partitions, you can load data from one partition, select another partition on
      the SAVE page, and save it into the newly-selected partition. It is not possible to transfer data
      directly between partitions - it must be done through memory, saving to diskette, or DAT
      backup (with the digital interface).

  REN
    In this page, you can rename individual files on disk, or rename a volume on disk (a diskette
    can contain only one volume, but a hard disk can contain many volumes). If you have a hard
    disk fitted or attached, select the partition, and the volume to be renamed, or the volume
    containing the file(s) to be renamed, otherwise, insert a diskette which contains data to be
    renamed. Press the NAME button to enter a new name.




Page 72                                                                                     Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                             Disk operations


     When you have entered the new name, press VOL to rename the volume (or diskette), or
     highlight a file with the CURSOR knob, and press FILE to rename the highlighted file.
     With a hard disk fitted, , MIDI Program Change messages may be used to load volumes. Use
     the "vol load number" parameter on this page to assign a number from 1 to 128 for the
     current volume, or set this value to OFF. On receipt of a Program Change message, the S1000
     will scan all the hard disk volumes for a number set in this page which corresponds to the
     Program Change number in the MIDI message. The volume will then be loaded (the
     currently-selected program number will change to 1, and program number 1 of the volume
     which has just been loaded will be selected). It is possible to assign the same number to more
     than one volume. In this case, the first volume encountered (starting at the next volume after
     the current volume) with this number will be selected. In this way, automatic loading of data
     can be performed by a sequencer without the need for manual intervention.
      NOTE: To rename a diskette or a file on a diskette, write-protection must be off.

  DEL
    In this page, you can delete a file or files from a diskette or hard disk. If you have a hard disk
    fitted, select the volume using the parameter field on the first line. There are a number of
    options that you can pick to determine what file(s) will be deleted.




      CURSOR ITEM ONLY, as its name suggests, deletes only that file which is highlighted by
      the cursor. ALL PROGRAMS ONLY deletes all programs, but not their associated samples.
      ALL SAMPLES deletes all samples on the current volume, and ENTIRE VOLUME is the
      most drastic, erasing all data on the volume. There is another option, OPERATING
      SYSTEM, which simply removes the operating system from the volume.
      NOTE: In order to delete a file or files from a diskette, write-protection must be off.

  HDSK
      When HDSK is pressed, three parameters are displayed, and two new options appear on the
      bottom line of the display (BACK and PARK ). The three parameters allow you
      to set the ID number of the hard disk, and the SCSI ID number of the S1000.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                               Page 73
Disk operations




     When using the IB-103 interface board, SCSI (Small Computer Systems Interface) numbers
     may be from 0 to 7, and the two numbers for the S1000 and the hard disk must be different. If
     an internal hard disk is fitted, the number of this hard disk will be set to 5, and the SCSI ID of
     the S1000 for use when accessing from an external initiator will be set to 6 (this number can
     be changed).
     When using the IB-102 interface board, Atari (or Supra) hard disks can take ID values from 0
     to 7 when used with the S1000. ID number 0 should be used.
     The BACK key allows you to use the optional digital interface board (IB-104) to back up the
     contents of a bard disk (or the current volume in memory) to a DAT using the digital interface
     board. Use the EDIT SAMPLE DIGI page to set up digital transmission and either optical or
     electrical transmission. The transmission rate should be selected (either 48.OkHz or 44.1kHz)
     to match the data rate of the DAT. Select either "MEMORY" or "BARD DISK" as an option.
     If you are backing up the volume in memory, you can change the volume name for further
     reference (use the NAME procedure). Start recording on the DAT, and press SAVE on the S1000.
     It will take about 30 seconds to save a volume. Samples will be saved in normal sample
     format, but sample headers, programs, etc will be saved in a special format. Both channels'
     data will be saved, but on restoration, only the L channel will be read.
       Backing up the contents of the hard disk is a similar process. However, due to a time gap
     inserted between each data block, each volume will take about 100 seconds to save. All
     volumes on the hard disk will be saved.
       Restoring data is a similar process. If you want to restore one volume into memory, enter the
      name of the previously-saved volume, set the "backup type" to "MEMORY", and press LOAD
      after setting the DAT to PLAY. If you wish to restore a hard disk, all volumes will be
      restored. It is not possible to make a partial restoration of data (one volume) from tape.
      As saving and restoration progresses, the number of samples, programs and total volumes will
      be displayed on screen.

           NOTE Though digital tape streaming offers many advantages in terms of speed,
            convenience, and price of media, AKAI does not guarantee the integrity of data
          backed up in this way. It is -therefore strongly recommended that for archive copies
                                      of your data, you use diskettes.




Page 74                                                                                Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                             Disk operations


      PARK is a very important operation if you have a hard disk fitted, and should be performed
 every time you end a session with a S1000 with a hard disk fitted. If you do not have a hard disk
 fitted, this does not apply to you. The PARK procedure makes the hard disk safe for
 transportation. If you neglect to do this, you stand the chance of losing the data on the hard disk
 and the hard disk itself if the S1000 is roughly handled. Press PARK . If, for some reason, the
 heads on the hard disk are not parked properly, a message will tell you to try again. If you keep
 retrying and this message continues to appear, contact your AKAI dealer. Head parking is not a
 luxury - it is a necessity if you intend moving your S1000.

 FORM
      Before you can use a diskette, it must be formatted. MF2DD disks should be formatted as
      low-density, and MF2HD disks should be formatted as high-density. As explained earlier in
      this manual, these different types of diskette can be formatted in the other way, but it is not
      recommended that you do this.




      Formatting a diskette will permanently remove all data previously recorded on it. Only
      format new diskettes or ones which contain data that you are sure you don't need any more.
      Insert the diskette in the drive, select "FLOPPY" at the top of the screen, and press
       HIGH or LOW , depending on the density of the diskette to be formatted. The process will take
      about a minute, and the track and side number of the diskette will be displayed as the
      operation proceeds.
      Hard disks can and should also be formatted before use. The maximum size of hard disk
      which can now be formatted and used with the S1000 is 510Mbytes (the largest size which
      could be recognized under previous versions of the S1000 operating system was 60Mbytes).
      If any larger hard disk is attached to the S1000, data above this size will not be recognized or
      used. For convenience, large hard disks should be split into partitions, which are named A,
      B, C, etc (if you are used to MS-DOS systems, these partitions are analogous to "logical
      drives" on a hard disk). All partitions must be the same size, which you can select with the
      "HARD PARTITIONS size" parameter to be 30, 40, 50 or 60Mbytes. The last partition on a
      hard disk takes up all the remaining space on the disk (eg on a 120Mbyte disk divided into
      50Mb partitions, A and B will both be 50Mbytes, and C will be 20Mbytes). However, note
      the following partition sizes for the AKAI-supplied hard disks (40 and 80Mbytes), and other
      disks of the same size, when they are divided into two or three partitions. Sizes are given in
      blocks, where one block is 8kbytes.




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                             Page 75
Disk operations

     4014byte hard disk
     Partition size as indicated       301.lbytes   40Mbytes      5014bytes     60mbytes
     on display
     Partition A                       3837         5117          5925          5925
     Partition B                       2085         805           -             -
     8014byte hard disk
     Partition size as indicated       30t4dytes    40Mbytes      50Nbytes      601•lbytes
     on display
     Partition A                       3837         5117          6397          7677
     Partition B                       3837         5117          3846          2566
     Partition C                       2556         -             -             -




     Select "HARD" at the top of the screen, and press either FORM or ARR, depending on the action
     you want to take. Formatting and arranging will both destroy all data on the hard disk -
     arranging being a faster operation than a full format (it simply initializes directories into a
     format suitable for use by the S1000). Make sure that there is no data which is only stored on
     the hard disk which you want to keep. When you press either FORM or ARR, you will be asked
     if you are sure that you want to delete all data on the hard disk. Answer "NO" if you have had
     second thoughts, otherwise answer "YES". Formatting will take a few minutes, followed by the
     arrange process. Bad blocks will be automatically "swapped out" in a verification procedure.
     You can bypass this verification process by pressing SKIP , but it is suggested that you let it
     run its course - it will end up safer in the long run.
      When you have initialized the hard disk, save the currently-loaded operating system to
      Volume 001 of the hard disk, using the DISK, SAVE, "OPERATING SYSTEM" options. When you
      turn on the S1000, this operating system will automatically be loaded from hard disk (quicker
      and more convenient than having to use a copy of the system diskette every time). You can
      use the Volume REN function to rename Volume 001 to "Boot Volume" or similar.




Page 76                                                                             Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                            MASTER TUNE

5 MASTER TUNE
   The MASTER TUNE button accesses a few basic jobs, primarily concerned with tuning.
   Tuning and transposing




        The 51000 can be transposed by +9 semitones and fine tuned by +50 cents (one semitone) to
        enable easy playing in difficult keys and to match tuning with other instruments. When you
        first press the MASTER TUNE button, two scales indicate the current transposition and tuning.
        Use the CURSOR knob to transpose up or down (one click of the knob equals one semitone),
        and the DATA knob to provide fine tuning (one click of the knob equals one cent). These
        transposition and tuning settings will be lost when power is turned off.
        There are two action soft keys ON and OFF. These will turn an audio signal on and off to the
        stereo output connectors (and the headphones).
        There are two sub-pages: TEMP and SOFT.

   TEMP




        Pressing the TEMP button allows you to set up different tuning temperaments for each
        program, if desired. If you are playing a percussive sample (say congas) in one program,
        which you do not want to correspond to standard Western chromatic equal temperament
        tuning, this is where you can alter things. Select the program whose temperament is to be
        altered on the top line of this screen. Use the CURSOR knob to select the note on the
        keyboard octave which will be retuned, and use the DATA knob to alter the tuning away
        from equal temperament by +25 cents (one quarter-tone). If you are retuning the C# key, for
        example, all notes played with the C# keys on the keyboard will be detuned by the amount
        you have set.




 Version 2.0 89/11                                                                            Page 77
    MASTER TUNE


 SOFT




     This page contains two parameters which affect the way when a "soft pedal" (MIDI controller
     67) is depressed, and a Note On command is received. The first parameter determines how the
     volume will be affected (0-99). The higher the number, the greater the amount of volume
     reduction. The second number determines how the attack will be stretched or "softened" when
     the controller is pressed. On an acoustic piano, the attack is not stretched when the soft pedal
     is depressed, but many other acoustic instruments have a slower, softer attack when played
     quietly. This parameter (0-99) allows you to simulate this.




                                                                                     Version 2.0 89/11
Page 78
6 DRUM
   The S1000 is capable of acting as a highly sophisticated percussion synthesizer, using the
AKAI ME-35T audio/MIDI trigger interface unit to produce MIDI trigger signals from a variety of
sources. Two such units may be connected, and programming of them may be carried out from the
S1000 rather than on the more limited displays and controls of the ME-35Ts. For such
programming to take place, a MIDI loop must be set up, from IN to OUT and OUT to IN.




                     Use the S1000 to set the OUTs of the ME-35Ts to a
                           "soft THRU" - first Unit 1, then Unit 2



   Since this is a manual for the S1000, full details of the operation of the ME-35T will not be
given here. Refer to the ME-35T manual for operational details. However, note that to set up the
MIDI Exclusive channel on the ME-35T, the MIDI CH and MIDI NOTE buttons on the ME-35T should
be pressed simultaneously. The following parameters on the ME-35T may be set up from the
S1000:




         The name of the drum input settings may be altered using the NAME procedure.
         Either one of two ME-35Ts airy be selected for parameter editing ("unit").



 Version 2.0 89/11                                                                       Page 79
   DRUM

    ALL inputs may be globally edited to rough values, and then individual (1-8) inputs may be
selected for fine adjustment. This method of working can save you a lot of time.
    The "chan" (1-16) and "note" (C0-G8) of the selected inputs) can be selected, as can the
sensitivity and trigger levels of the inputs (both can be varied from 0 to 99). Note that as the trigger
levels are adjusted, they are displayed graphically on the right of the screen.
    The capture, recovery and on-time of the inputs can be adjusted, The capture and recovery times
are variable from OmS to 20mS, and the on-time is variable from 0 to 999mS.
    One of eight velocity response curves may be chosen - see the ME-35T manual for details of
these curves.
    The second page of the DRUM mode, accessed by pressing CONT, allows you to set up MIDI
parameters for up to two ME-35T units. Parameters which you can set are: operation (ON or OFF),
exclusive channels for programming (1-16) and enable of MIDI THRU operation (ON or OFF). To
return to the first DRUM page, press EDIT.
   OPTION
       The OPTION button is not currently implemented. However, in line with AKAI's policy of
       continuous product improvement, later releases of the operating system may use it.




 Page 80                                                                                Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                                       APPENDICES


APPENDICES
   The following pages contain information that, while not essential to the operation of the
S1000, nonetheless may be useful as reference.
  Technical Specifications

   Display                                              Backlit 320 characters/240 x 640 graphic LCD
   Diskette drive                                       3.5" dual density drive, 2Mbyte capacity (2HD),1 Mbyte capacity (2DD)
   Size (maximum dimensions)                            483 x 133 x 425(mm) (19 x 6.26 x 16.76(in)) (W x H x D) (EIA 3U size)
   Weight                                               9.5kg (211bs)
   Power requirements/consumption                       120VAC, 60Hz (USA, Canada)
                                                        220VAC, 50Hz (Europe, except UK)
                                                        240VAC, 50OHz (UK, Australia)
   Sampling rates                                       44.1kHz, 22.O5kHz (20Hz-20kHz, 20Hz-lOkHz audio bandwidth)
   Data format                                          16-bit linear encoding
   Memory                                               2Mbyte standard, expandable to 8Mbyte
   Sampling time (unexpanded memory)                    23.76 seconds - mono @ 44.1kHz
                                                        47.52 seconds – mono @ 22.O5kHz
                                                        11.88 seconds - stereo @ 44.1kHx
                                                        23.76 seconds - stereo @ 22.ObkHz
   Maximum number of samples                            200
   Maximum number of programs                           100
   Pitch shifting                                       32 octaves (1 cent steps) interpolation and decimation 24-bit algorithm,
                                                        using custom VLSI circuit
   Filter                                               Digital moving low-pass filter (-18dB/octave)
   Envelope generators                                  2 z digital ADSR
   Connectors
   REC IN (not S1000PB)                                 2 x XLR (balanced)
                                                        2 x 1/4-inch phone (unbalanced)
   STEREO OUT                                           2 x 1/4-inch phone (unbalanced)                       -3dBv, 600
   ASSIGNABLE OUTS                                      8 x 1/4-inch phone (unbalanced)                       -3dBv, 600tZ
   EFFECT SEND                                          1 x 1/4-inch phone (unbalanced)                       -3dBv, 600
   EFFECT RETURNS                                       2 x 1/4-inch phone (L, R) (unbalanced)                -3dbV, lOk
   HEADPHONES                                           1 x 1/4-inch stereo phone
   FOOTSWITCH                                           1 x 1/4-inch phone
   MIDI                                                 IN, OUT, THRU
   REC GAIN (not S1000PB)                               HI –58dBm, MID -38dBm, LO -18dBm
   OPTIONS
   EXM005                                               2Mbyte memory expansion board (up to 8Mbytes may be fitted)
   IBI02                                                Atari hard disk interface
   IB-103                                               SCSI interface
   IB-104                                               AES/EBU digital interface
   BL1000                                               3.6 inch blank diskettes (MF2HD)
   For details of internal hard disks, please consult   your AKAI dealer




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                                                                  Page 81
 APPENDICES

  MIDI IMPLEMENTATION CHART for S1000 series


 FUNCTION                           TRANSMITTED             RECOGNIZED              REMARKS

 Basic Default                      x                       o1                      without disk
 Channel Changed                    x                       o 1 - 16                memorized (disk)
 Default                            x                       Mode 3                  without disk
                                                            Mode 1-4                memorized (disk)
 Mode Messages                                              OMNI On/Off. P/M
 Altered                            **************          x
 Note                               x                       24 -127
 Number: True Voice                 ************            24 - 127
 Velocity Note On                   x                       o 9n V=1-127
 Note Off                           x                       o 8n V=1-127            Release Velocity
 After- Keys                        x                       x
 touch Chs                          x                       o
 Pitchbend                          x                       o                       0-12 semitone steps
                                                                                    (8-bit resolution)
 Control 1                          x                       o                       Modulation wheel
 Change 7                           x                       O                       Volume
 64                                 x                       o                       Sustain pedal
 67                                 x                       o                       Soft pedal
 Program Change                     x                       1-128
 True f1                            *******                                         by Preset number
                                                                                    value
 System Exclusive                   0                       0                       AKAI ID 47h
                                                                                    S1000 48h *1
 System Song Pos                    x                       x
 Common Song Sel                    x                       x
 Tune                               x                       x
 System Clock                       x                       x
 Real time Command                  x                       x
 Aux Local on/off                   x                       x
 Messages All Note Off              x                       o (123)
 Active Sense                       x                       x
 Reset                              x                       x




  MODE 1: Omni On, Poly                                         MODE 3: Omni On, Mono
  MODE 2: Omni Off, Poly                                        MODE 4: Omni Off, Mono



      *1   Full details of System Exclusive data formats can be obtained by contacting
      your AKAI dealer.




Page 82                                                                                            Version 2.0 89/11
                                                                                            APPENDICES


 S1000 PROGRAM CHART
     (!'his chart is provided as an example of how to record the program settings you create for the S1000. Feel free
     to make copies of this page for your own use)
                 Disk Name                                   Sequence disk


                 Date                                        Size


                 Session                                     Producer


                 Piece                                       Artist


  Program name               Samples     Keygroup            Keyspan         Pan   Out   Tuning     MIDI charnel
                                                       LOW      HIGH




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                                              Page 83
ARertouch                                           DRUM button                                    20
 See 'Pressure'                                     E
Assigning keygroups                           5l    EDIT PROG button                                20
Attack hold                                   56
Audio/MIDI interface (ME-35T)                 79    EDIT SAMPLE button                              20
Audio connections                             22    Editing numbers                             19, 20
Autolooping                                   41    Effect END/RETURN                               22
                                                    Effects                                         61
B                                                    Connections                                    22
Backup to DAT                                 74      Programs                                      29
Balanced sample sources                             EGrelease rate sad Note Off                     66
 Recording connections                              EG release rate sad Note On                     65
Bandwidth of samples                           17   ENT/PLAY button
                                           34, 47                                           21, 36, 66
Basic loudness                                      Entering names
Boot-up priorities             _               29   Envelope Generator 1                            21
See also 'OperonngSyah'm                             Velocity and speed                             55
Buttons                                             Envelope Generator 2                            55
                                                9   Equal temperament                               56
C                                                   F                                               77
Changing between display pages
Connections                                         FCC Notice
 General                                            Fields                                           5
 Sound sources                                      Filters                                          9
Constant pitch samples                               Cutoff-frequency of LPF
Control wheels                                       Cute frequency                                 54
 Pan position                                        Low-pass filter                                58
 Pitch LFO                                     62    MIDI filter                                    54
Copying samples                                63    Re-sampling filters                            65
Copyright                                      32    Velocity effect on LPF                         48
Crossfading                                    3    FIND button                                     54
 Looping crassfading                                 see 'Autolooping'
 Positional cmesfading                              Floppy disks
 Splice crossfading                            41
                                            9, 52    See Disks'
 Velocity croesfading                               FOOT SW connector
Cursor                                         42                                                    22
                                            9, 67    Sample start
CURSOR buttons (S1000PB)                            Footswitches
CURSOR knob                                     9                                                    22
                                               18    Sample start
CYCLIC mode (time-stretch)                           Starting the sampling process                   33
                                               18
D                                              46   Formatting
                                                     Hard disk                                       76
                                                    Formatting disks                                 36
DAT backup                                     74    H
Deleting                                            Hard disk
 All Programs                               30       Bad blocks                                      76
 Programs                                   29       Formatting                                      76
 Programs and samples                       30       Parking the heads                               75
 Samples                                    32       Partitions                                      75
Deleting files from disk                    73       Program Change and volumes                      73
Desync (pitch LFO)                          63       Transferring data between partitions            72
Digital interface board                     35       Use with operating system                       76
Digital transmission of data                35       Verifying                                       76
DISK button                             20, 69      Head parking (hard disk)                         75
Disk drive                                  14      Headphones                                       16
Disk types                                  15      Hints on looping                                 41
Disks                                       73
 Deleting files                             75
 Densities                           15,36,75       I
 Forma                               69
 Loading files                             26
 Loading from disk                         30        Individual OUTs                         22, 58, 61
 Loading programs                                      Programs                                      29
                                                     1NTELL mode (time-stretch)                      47
  Loading programs and samples from disk       31    J
  Naming disks                                 72   JOIN button
  Reading S900 data                            69    see "Splicing samples"
  Renaming files                               72   JUMP button                                     21
  Saving files
  Saving samples to disk
                                               71
                                               36
                                                     K
                                                     Key follow
  Storage of disks                             26     LPF
  Write-protect                                15     Pan position                                  54
 Display                                              Volume                                        62
  See "LCD display'                                  Keygroup                                       61
                                                      See also “Keyspan”




Version 2.0 89/11                                                                                         Index - i
       INDEX
Keygroups                                       61     O
Keyrsnge                                        29     OMNI override
Keys                                             9                                                   64
Kepapan                                                Operating software
                                            10, 53      See 'Operating System"
L                                                      Operating System                          10,14
                                                        Copying                                      16
LCD display                                     17      Loading                                      24
 Sample display                                 38                                                   76
 Zooming in and out                             39      Loading/saving with hard disk
                                                       Optical transmission of data                  35
LFO                                             10                                                   21
 Pan position                                   62     OPTION button
                                                       Original pitch of samples                 34, 35
 Pitch desync                                   63                                               45, 49
 Program Pitch                                  62     Original pitch setting of samples
Loading files from disk                         69     P
Loading programs and samples from disk           31    Page                                          10
Loading programs from disk                       30    Pan position                              58, 62
LOOP IN RELEASE                              45, 49     Control                                      62
LOOP UNTIL RELEASE                           45, 49     Key follow                                   62
Looping                                          10     LFO                                          62
 Autolooping                                     41    Pan positioning                               29
 Hints                                           41     Program                                      10
 Loop length                                     41    Parameters                                    75
 Looping crossafading                            41    Parking the heads of a hard disk              75
 Pitch offset                                 45,50    Partitions on hard disks
 Setting the loop number                         40    Personal computers
 Setting the loop point                          40     Use for atoning and editing samples          67
 Time                                            40    Pitch
Looping samples                                  39     Change using EG2
Low Frequency Oscillator                                                                               55
                                                        Original pitch of samples                  34, 35
 See “LFO"                                             Pitch bend
 M                                                      Program pitch                                  63
                                                       Pitch of programs                               62
                                                       Pitch shift
MARK button                                     21      Program                                        29
MASTER TUNE                                     77     PLAY TO SAMPLE END                          45, 50
MASTER TUNE button                              2O     Playback mode of samples                    45, 49
ME-35T                                      20, 79     Polyphony                                       28
Memory available display                        34     Positional croasfading                      10, 52
MIDI                                                   PPM (MIDI?                                       66
Connectors                                       23    PPM (sampling)                                   36
Filter                                           65    Pressure
OMNI                                             28     Control of volume                              61
OMNI override                                    64     Pitch LFO                                      63
PPMB                                             66     Program pitch                                  63
Program Change                                   64    Pressure sad LPF                                54
Program Change OMNI                              64    Priority                                        28
Receive monitor                                  66    Program
Sample data transmission                         67     Assigning keygroups                            51
Teat note                                        66     BEAT parameter                                 53
MIDI button                                      20     Constant pitch samples                         57
Program Change                                   64     Cutoff frequency of LPF                        68
MIDI channel                                     28     Deleting                                       29
MIDI controller 67 (soft pedal)                  78     Editing                                        51
MIDI note names                                         Envelope Generator 1                           55
 Display                                         34     Envelope Generator 2                        54, 56
MIDI System Exclusive                            67     External effects                               29
Miring samples                                   43     Filter                                         54
Monitor                                                 Filter key follow                              64
 During sampling                         32, 33, 49     Individual OUTs                                58
 MIDI                                             66    Keyrange                                       29
Mufti-timbral operation                           10    Keyapan                                        53
Multisampling                                     10    Level                                 29
N                                                       Loading from disk                 26, 30
NAME button                                      21     Loading programs and samples from disk        31
Names                                            21      MIDI channel                                   28
Naming                                                   Pan position                          29, 68, 62
 Samples                                     32, 49      Pitch                                         62
NO LOOPING                                   45, 50      Pitch bend                                    63
Note-stealing                                    28      Pitch change from EG2                         66
 Priority                                        28      Pitch shift                                   29
Note names                                       34      Playing Programs                              26
 Display                                         55      Pressure and LPF                              64
Note Off velocity                                55      Priority                                      28
Mote On velocity                                 20      Programs with the same number                 27
Number keypad                                34, 47      Renumbering                                   27
Nyquist'e theorem




 Index - ii                                                                                     Version 2.0 89/11
INDEX
 Sample coherence                             62      Stereo                                     33
 Sample level                                 68      Stereo names                           32, 49
 Selecting program                            26      Time-stretch                               46
 Selecting samples                            67      Trigger level                              36
       Sustain of sound during program change 27      Ttimmin8                                   38
 Tuning of samples                        63, 68      Velocity switching                         67
                                                      Zooming the display                        39
 Velar                                               Saving files to disk                        71
 Vel     and volume offset                   54      Saving samples to disk                      36
 Volume                                      61       Saving samples to disk                     36
 Volume control by velocity                  61      Screen
Program Change                               64      See "LCD display"
Program Change sad volumes                   73     SCSI
Program Change OMNI                          &4      Bulk data transmission                     68
Programs 10                                          ID numbers
 R                                                      See also "Hard dish"
Radio interference                                   SELECT PROG
 See "FCC notice"                                       Functions                               26
                                         47 48       SELECT PROG button                         20
Re-sampling at different rates                       Selecting samples for a program            57
 Filters                                 17, 33      SLCT soft key
REC GAIN switch                                                                                 34
                                                     SMP1                                       57
REC IN connectors                        17 66       Soft key                                   11
Receive monitor for MIDI                 36,36       Soft keys                               17,20
Recording 'meter"                                       See LCD display"
Recording time                           34,36          Action                                  18
Renaming                                                Function                                18
 Samples                                     33         Selected                                17
Renaming files on disk                       72         SLCT                                    34
Renumbering programs                         27      Soft pedal                                 78
RESP (in SELECT PROG)                        28      Sound source connections                   33
Reversing samples
 s
S900 data
                                             45      Splicing
                                                     Splicing samples
                                                                                                11
                                                                                                43
                                                        Splice crossfading                      43
Safety requirements                                  Starting the S1000KB                       24
 UK Customers                                        Starting the sampling process           33, 36
Sample                                       4       Stereo connections                          22
Sample level is a program                    11      Stretching samples
Samples                                      68         See also “Time-stretching samples”
 Autoloopiag                                         Synthesizer waveforms
 Bandwidth                                           System Exclusive (sample dump)             57
 Connection of sound sources                  41                                                67
 Copying                                      34
 Deleting                                     33     T
 Editing                                      32     Temperaments                                77
 End point                                    32     Test audio signal                           77
 Footewitch                                   38     Time-stretching samples                     45
 Hints on looping                             38      CYCLIC mode                                46
 Loop length                                  22     Transposition                               77
 Loop pitch offset                            41     Trigger level
 Loop time                                    41      Samples
                                          46, 6(?    Trimming samples                            36
 Looping                                                                                         38
                                              40      Trimming
                                              39     Tuning                                      38
  Looping crosdMemory available               41     Tuning of samples in a program              77
                       lay                    34                                                 68
  Mixing                                      43      U
                                      32, 33, 49     Unbalanced sample sources
  Monitoring during sampling                  33      Recording connection                       17
  Mono                                    34, 35      V
  Original pitch                          45,49      Velocity
  Original pitch setting                  46, 49      Pitch LFO                                  63
  Playback mode                               21     Velocity affecting envelope speed           55
  Playback with ENT/PLAY button               47     Velocity and LPF                            54
  Re-sampling at different rates          36, 36     Velocity crossfading                    11, 57
  Recording "meter"                           17     Velocity switching                          57
  Recording connections                       17     Velocity volume control                     61
  Recording level                             17     Velocity zones                              11
                                          34,36      Verifying
                                              32      Hard disk                                  76
  Recording time                              48     Volume (sound)                          16, 29
  Renaming                                    62      Control by key follow                      61
  Reversing                                   36      Control by pressure                        61
  Sample coherence                            40      In program                                 61
  Saving to disk                              43      Program                                    29
  Setting the loop point -                    43      Velocity control                           61
  Splice Splice crosefading                   38
  Splicing                                33, 36
  Start point
  Starting the sampling process



 Version 2.O 89/11                                                                                    Index - iii
INDEX


volume (memory)      12
W
Warranty              2
Z
Zooming in and out   39




Index - iv                Version 2.0 89/11
