


a) 
\, 


iStur 


,do not 


Im OF MO 


Oo 
‘= 
40) 
N 
4°) 

AGE 

<< 
O 
@) 

Mor 
WY) 
2 
@) 
® 
Hs 
= 
® 
> 
@® 
i 
or 
Oo 

a 


>. OlOksiom lal fcowrst @)@)it-lalersm (em fe! 


Operator’s Manual 


WARNING 









~ 


MIDI STEREO DIGITAL SAMPLER 


~~ 














- 





. 





AKAI S2800 
MIDI STEREO DIGITAL SAMPLER 
Software Version 1.0 
Operator’s Manual 





WARNING!! 


To prevent fire or shock hazard, do not expose this appliance 
to rain or moisture. 








CAUTION 


RISK OF ELECTRIC SHOCK 
DO NOT OPEN 


CAUTION: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF ELECTRIC SHOCK, 
DO NOT REMOVE COVER (OR BACK). 

NO USER-SERVICEABLE PARTS INSIDE. 

REFER SERVICING TO QUALIFIED SERVICE PERSONNEL. 


THE SYMBOLS ARE RULED BY UL STANDARDS (U.S.A.) 


The lightning flash with the arrowhead symbol superimposed 
across a graphical representation of a person, within an equilat- 

- eral triangle, is intended to alert the user to the presence of 
uninsulated “dangerous voltage” within the product's enclosure; 
that may be of sufficient magnitude to constitute a risk of electric 
shock. 


The exclamation point within an equilateral triangle is intented to 
alert the user to the presence of important operating and mainte- 
nance (servicing) instructions in the literature accompanying the 
appliance. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


WARNING 


Power requirements for electrical equipment vary from area to area. Please ensure that 
your S2800 meets the power requirements in your area. If in doubt, consult a qualified 
electrician or Akai Professional dealer. 


120V 


@ 60Hz for USA and Canada 


220V-230V @ 50Hz for Europe (excluding UK) 


240V 


@ 50Hz for UK and Australia 


PROTECTING YOURSELF AND THE S2800 


* 


Never touch the AC plug with wet hands. 


Always disconnect the S2800 from the power supply by pulling on the plug, not the 
cord. 


Allow only an Akai Professional dealer or qualified professional engineer to repair 
or reassemble the S2800. Apart from voiding the warranty, unauthorized 
engineers might touch live internal parts and receive a serious electric shock. 


Do not put, or allow anyone to put any object, especially metal objects, into the 
$2800. 


Use only a household AC power supply. Never use a DC power supply. 


lf water or any other liquid is spilled into or onto the S2800, disconnect the power, 
and call your dealer. 


Make sure that the unit is well-ventilated, and away from direct sunlight. 


To avoid damage to internal circuitry, as well as the external finish, keep the S2800 
away from sources of direct heat (stoves, radiators, etc). 


Avoid using aerosol insecticides, etc near the S2800. They may damage the 
surface, and may ignite. 


Do not use denaturated alcohol, thinner or similar chemicals to clean the S2800. 
They will damage the finish. 


Make sure that the $2800 is always well-supported when in use (either in a 
specially-designed equipment rack, or a firm level surface). 


When installing the S2800 in a 19" rack system, always allow 1U of ventilated free 
space above it to allow for cooling. Make sure that the back of the rack is 
unobstructed to allow a clear airflow. 


UK CUSTOMERS 


Important safety notice The flex supplied with this machine has three wires, as shown in 
the illustration. 


Green/Yellow 
(earth) 






Blue 
(neutral) 


*** WARNING: THIS APPLIANCE MUST BE EARTHED *** 


IMPORTANT 
The wires in this mains lead are coloured in accordance with the following code: 
Green and yellow - earth 
Blue - neutral 
Brown - live 


As the colours of the wires in the flex may not correspond to the colour markings in your 
plug, make sure that wires are connected in the following way. 


The green and yellow wire should be connected to the terminal marked ‘E’ or marked with 
the safety earth symbol (=); the blue wire is connected to the terminal marked ‘N’, or 
coloured black. The brown wire should be connected to the terminal marked ‘L’, or 
coloured red. Make sure all terminal screws are tightened and there are no loose strands 
of wire. Ensure also that the flex is securely fastened by the plug's cable grip. 


This equipment conforms to No. 82/499/EEC, 87/308 EEC standard 


CONFORME AL D.M. 13 APRILE 1989 DIRETTIVA CEE/87/308 


FCC WARNING 


This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a Class B digital 
device pursuant to Part 15 of the FCC rules. These limits are designed to provide 
reasonable protection against harmful interference in a residential installation. This 
equipment generates, uses, and can radiate radio frequency energy and, if not installed 
and used in accordance with the instructions, may cause harmful interference to radio 
communications. However, there is guarantee that interference will not occur in a 
particular installation. If this equipment does cause harmful interference to radio or 
television reception, which can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the 
user is encouraged to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures: 


Reorientate or relocate the receiving antenna. 
Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver. 


Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to which the 
receiver is connected. 


Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help. 


AVIS POUR LES ACHETEURS CANADIENS DU S2800 


Le présent appareil numérique n’émet pas des bruits radioélectriques dépassant les 
limites applicables aux appareils numériques de la Class B prescrites dans le Régle- 
ment sur le brouillage radioélectrique édicté par le ministere des Communications du 
Canada 


FUR KUNDEN IN DER BUNDESREPUBLIK DEUTSCHLAND 
Bescheinigung von AKAI 


Hiermit wird bescheinigt, daB das Gerat AKAI 
$2800 


in Ubereinstimmung mit den Bestimmungen der 
Amtsblattverfugung 1046/1984 


funkentst6rt ist. 


Der Deutschen Bundespost wurde das Inverkehrbringen dieses Gerates angezeigt und 
die Berichtigung zur Uberpriifung der Serie auf Einhaltung der Bestimmungen einge- 
raumt. 

AKAI ELECTRIC CO., LTD 





COPYRIGHT NOTICE 


The AKAI S2800 is acomputer-based instrument, and as such contains and uses software 
in ROMs anddisks. This software, and all related documentation, including this Operator's 
Manual, contain proprietary information which is protected by copyright laws. All rights are 
reserved. No part of the software or its documentation may be copied, transferred or 
modified. You may copy the operating software and any samples, programs, etc contained 
on disks for your own personal use. All other copies of the software are in violation of 
copyright laws. You may not distribute copies of the software to others, or transfer the 
software to another computer by electronic means. You may not modify, adapt, translate, 
lease, distribute, resell for profit or create derivative works based on the software and its 
related documentation or any part thereof without prior written consent from AKAI Electric 
Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan. 


WARRANTY 


AKAI Electric Co. Ltd warrants its products, when purchased from an authorized AKAI dealer, to be 
free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of 12 (twelve) months from the date of 
purchase. Warranty service is effective and available to the original purchaser only, and only on 
completion and return of the AKAI Warranty Registration Card within 14 days of purchase. 


Warranty coverage is valid for factory-authorized updates to AKAI instruments and their software, 
when their installation is performed by an authorized AKAI Service Centre, and a properly completed 
Warranty Registration has been returned to your Akai Professional dealer. 


To obtain service under this warranty, the product must, on discovery of the defect, be properly 
packed and shipped to the nearest AKAI Service Centre. The party requesting warranty service must 
provide proof of original ownership and date of purchase of the product. 


If the warranty is valid, AKAI will, without charge for parts or labour, either repair or replace the 
defective part(s). Without a valid warranty, the entire cost of the repair (parts and labour) is the 
responsibility of the product’s owner. 


AKAI warrants that it will make all necessary adjustments, repairs and replacements at no cost to 
the original owner within 12 (twelve) months of the purchase date if: 


1 The product fails to perform its specified functions due to failure of one or more of its 
components. 

2 The product fails to perform its specified functions due to defects in workmanship. 

3 The product has been maintained and operated by the owner in strict accordance with the 


written instructions for proper maintenance and use as specified in this Operator's Manual. 


Before purchase and use, owners should determine the suitability of the product for their intended 
use, and the owner assumes all risk and liability whatsoever in connection therewith. AKAI shall not 
be liable for any injury, loss or damage, direct or consequential, arising out of the use, or inability to 
use the product. 


The warranty provides only those benefits specified, and does not cover defects or repairs needed 
as a result of acts beyond the control of AKAI, including, but not limited to: 


1 Damage caused by abuse, accident or negligence. AKAI will not cover under warranty any 
Original factory disk damaged or destroyed as a result of the owner’s mishandling. 

2 Damage caused by any tampering, alteration or modification of the product: operating 
software, mechanical or electronic components. 

3 Damage caused by failure to maintain and operate the product in strict accordance with the 
written instructions for proper maintenance and use as specified in this Operator's Manual. 

4 Damage caused by repairs or attempted repairs by unauthorized persons. 

> Damage caused by fire, smoke, falling objects, water or other liquids, or natural events such 


as rain, floods, earthquakes, lightning, tornadoes, storms, etc. 
6 Damage caused by operation on improper voltages. 
IMPORTANT NOTE: This warranty becomes void if the product or its software is electronically 
modified, altered or tampered with in any way. 


AKAI shall not be liable for costs involved in packing or preparing the product for shipping, with regard 
to time, labour or materials, shipping or freight costs, or time and expenses involved in transporting 
the product to and from an AKAI Authorized Service Centre or Authorized Dealer. 


AKAI will not cover under warranty an apparent malfunction that is determined to be user error, or 
the owner's inability to use the product. 


THE DURATION OF ANY OTHER WARRANTIES, WHETHER IMPLIED OR EXPRESS, INCLUD- 
ING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE IMPLIED CONDITION OF MERCHANTABILITY, IS LIMITED TO 
THE DURATION OF THE EXPRESS WARRANTY HEREIN. 


AKAI hereby excludes incidental or consequential damages, including but not limited to: 


Loss of time 

Inconvenience 

Delay in performance of the Warranty 
The loss of use of the product 
Commercial loss 


on fF WH YO — 


Breach of any express orimplied warranty, including the Implied Warranty of Merchantability, 
applicable to this product 


CONTENTS i 





CONTENTS 
WARRANTY, WARNINGS AND COPYRIGHT NOTICES ...0.............scssssscecssssessesscscessceseeee i 
OS Free cecancccdntnes nen iaasmcnececctterceaaictnoeed anv nisianenceavaneinimebthennsaneaiieieawailesinds 1 
AAD EF IRAIES A, EUR ile GIREE VEGIIN sicasaisnscanssinecsconcoansanisnaininnnsnstiines taxienminiesieimandaneannipasiers 4 
EERE: IVP REIS SRE Ohs LRN SD asigicacncectcnavnccadanns idasuinawemmaasiiabia bos tbuadasculuisaincuinn adsacenataubeiasNs 4 
RERIR TAR PEGS cd cca sanstra ditersheigasentuceoteowaanbncn quae ticusanancs ab Wencsaasgon nada dbanslnieobigalabeyseien 5 
RAR PUR SRS WD stictaiviasteandinccentndedasinntedecvint thahle li sinacusneiiehadinkdgapleniuatbaibetiinaneyPalsyncknimaasioitens 5 
SELECTING PARAMETERS AND ENTERING DATA, .ccccsiscossssvhissstesiscersessiseninsosereteosseose 6 
DAARE, ADEE FUE EY aces tacnessiiornicncnscinvniscantencantensasnaaspbacannaowmininannasenseiacsebavmmaneuiiens 7 
INABAING FILES ~ THE NAME BEY sjicccd sicesicnccscsticciespussosenscapenctapiccta cbiaceusibaciaisuaaatinisons 8 
REESE ELE BAIA NIG S -cceactinad sc viscous henson halecacbeannteknimnimaetn tabdeptinacheapinbatignoncnaaaaagehieies 8 
TERE BREE Ey RIPEN ES carcicernivsnansnsisaccpnananaasisenenascusnnes ence iudesemiacenunds sunisndhe binnecueasduninnsésiisngn 8 
DIETS AR Ae 3 OUI RIS ie initisetntacatncisienccanianniaaeeasihaiianiseamnaes tannins Kenaageninsicsn 9 
PAISLEY PPP dg & sss sissicecssts sn auestine snecgenclendinaat leccas suciesiaddae aes aulosabalba nal iuhiakieenbsiaaickaiecieaiis 10 
BR Ae Etat A icieiaiigchinc ata ais cei cadet eases eainniea eacbsnadaeeas Aan aad ehinl ga cama ebdecoameatenuees 10 
RECORD LEVEL, MAIN OUTPUT LEVEL, HEADPHONE OUTPUT .................cssceseseeees 10 
PF REC RRaRE SINE B eincesissccasvnsvitisaxiabantiangninameniasasaiikaannbaaaicnbbianeiannstuiiphava aie ass caNeChiss 11 
ge E LE og N | 2) RR een ee eS CT ee nT eT eT TE eT eee 12 
ANALARIUE OUTPUT CONNECTIONS 35 licecisinsicscistssscescitesiitnnsstilelacsseesdelsvancicesssetbeakinssne 12 
PAPEL ETE Or ia ianten ls becvctnn lasts vstenteexnactindssienenchdecieile ththvaenlesaeamsiutsupalclindoksseaveapertens 12 
ERAN Oe OER EA AR eisai tiaicacenhexehcinianccaeiceuniitstanccnaauantsnatentdainai aside caieunanle Beeeaacuiiansiee 12 
POPUPS Fes SIR) hg UN) basa aciinicis Seiiiccensicaseiacieaea ncebnaeenanisaisaieasaaun ian aan oleae ed ates 13 
IRE PAT RATE BUR LD sce ncecasvaica cicvousncaepuccusniiancen cach snd Mau aaah hse Abe MRN EA aN siachabh vat obeebiints 3 
Ta Es BR iis sieeninncanaidsseenetennirenseestntebnonndlcctlase stk henenesstretlemniienatenns 13 
aU A ACT GRE, BERS aR) aiiscniicscabiaiekasidaniecacsaiceanapaacassegeece sane mapa AANA 14 
CE INS science deiescevetiaesahe vue wnis sone nes tase etn aRP AR iiNa mada aaa taabnan een 14 
CSB ENCE Baek Pe 8 ohio esses sn cscinnd Sas Veccncc canadien tnt nna bia nciccsad ucts Mpaweaai haath eiceebbaeaehisecnmaeaanes 15 
RR ARES Ad WWE iss a aceaih accnaaiceca a ind inane teria lk wsaamen tienen nmtaneraaimeamibiats 16 
Re ERA? WEG REALS visseuiscndoaesussntintecinvtivencninasrescchesontiness ceuvenavindiemameinsaeuaatramueensbins 17 
DS TAILED DIAGRAM OF SZB00 FUNCTIONS csisssssscsacascsasnssasssascnsssesseesssscoseasnosscosesesnes 18 
SUA Rs L. MRA IGE ssconcsihianiciauituiicnaweica via daiican saleable deanna duis ustacisveudaaaies le ianeniinaionninenaaapad banaue 18 
BUSAN IRS SOU AAD siscsanansvciiisienpeiaciatiens ianiuoveteinencabvsdeliaipeatatanmonndastunieantunh Waste 19 
VE aE OOD cic sh cpio sccrtessncnccnininnacanicdicnaxssmnsianiend MeawicivccusiadliasTesadindastiuismesinies 19 
FORE NA LIVERS RAMMLENGE SOUR RFI CALIVESS .oniissscessvissnsensasiedinass siesiconasespcentixuskesblcvnMasaievassedicabenssebnanoie 20 
MIAING SOUNDS ON THE S280 siascics sccscensorccamsses imaecsanasnecsleasestlints dansanteasucenints 21 
BRE IM ‘citictecacassicsa nantes canbiinineheth exci adecmeansesnbaasaispeed bade canoe aiataatea tase Mathie Bierebdabcahs Ze 
BP a RR IN IRE Oh oicesiidnteviavcesucsoniviveiien cexcedaieraiacetndenancek bens auanonaah duiatade Niccnecakionsanoeneeevieisieus 24 
LOATHING PROBE SEARDD DISK ss saisccscccsnicacbvnsnnsaistiondd hateceicuct nunascvinaavacnl ecciciehccenion 25 
ORL TRUS POTD oss cdccsndssatios ci cia Gaiectusvc eisvatahini tate Dan saicaeastbiacetncssivensacantnsteetens 25 
REEGS. AA Es Ate a MORK iacienesvasusasonsn cicnceniepailonniad Gai ce aaa vasabaicatwin ateuanntactieeeusseds 27 
Psd cirsitnvideumansontentansieensendianensiaemuaviniiioacmnnceiinlae tan ican Pam: 29 
I Fa nO ot sidan nics nsanicnscsina saptsiasacnintieaanizobabtidiesianeainaaivas teuasatd since caatea Reciastautwantbuaves 30 
ig i Lal Oa SL) 9 9 ol Ser eee ene cee Ene Nn Eye, RNS OER TET Lies SS OR LORS ene 31 
SPEGLAEN E xinissbssutd askance Susspnaniauin caceetimmnasbpenaienens cada eadecpnain vlieas ebensseuadees si sea bagearaiimnrduennse 32 
DUAR SALAS SORE Ae A scenitesh doshd banupeninasticumnnaninsseReaavaneps Kamppicaeas canetsaaacanaeae een uaiaTenanaiuN 33 
COPTING AND MOVING EFFECTS AROUND  sssissssissiciccccsssasscrasisiontsnmstcinnenseabanedtceceaes 33 
USING SELECT PROG - PROGRAMS WITH THE SAME NUMBER .................cceeceeeeeeees 33 
EPR LOTET EARP TUTE sity us coapicciaanineig isianenenaaeionnevenntonnae lie ciubicangsesdniyeteaababianeintesise 33 
CRA TINGE BG LD E> PL MOLD D xisecisexinnrsinasanccccnisaeaaaianaseaaenieae 34 
CREATING REY BOARD SPLITS = MEU © ivccscrveasecicinvcceososctvonnclusnchsdsiessastxsncounesacsne 34 
USING RENUMBERING TO CREATE MULTI-TIMBRAL SETUPS ...... eee eeceeeeceeeseeeeeeees 34 
CFG SARIN icxsniccsivnsieisnts sitesceniesboesesned susthesusntiaduakandiiidexsivehanesotal ives caadesencsawarnantietesaustae casein 35 
EE DAMELE ~ RECORDERS ANI TIN TIS: asissesccsiscccmcccscceaasasiictancbenmaneiniavenaanbenvecss 36 


Version 1.0 10/92 


ii CONTENTS 


EE Bro CaN RO cerciericc ccichsciectnctinc aces nn pbameadasibaredecd sisnes tesanayanbaisesiasauieauseancaaxeanaess 36 
THE MAIN SAMPLE SELBaC TPR aA A bila lacicccccesccesccnssccccssscnseecscasesscessencesssseseaess 38 
NAMING SAMPLES - COPYING AND RENAMING. .......2222.............ecsscceccccesssssececeeceeesscees 39 
DORE ACTING SAME iS viccieesiscnsavninicccncommasesceaenieiabrakthunaceab anes sacssenncietauscindatiaeasidessve teres: 40 
Ee INGE OP FE A Ci icine ssac catenisasacieninacccmnsasameninsiansbesesiansveniniasseeausinnesseeis 41 
IMPORTANT NOTE - SAVING RECORD PARAMETERS TO DISK ...000...e cece cece eeeeeeees 43 
ADJUSTING THE RECORDING AND THRESHOLD LEVEL .....................scssccccessssceeoes 44 
RECORDING ON THE S280 sscsssvestassansiastersscivaiontenccsssecsdeuncesercivmndszecesdunssaighssdsstuseveisnreie 44 
RECORDING DIGITAL Y isciccssssnchsnnsascocassdetuncnensaess sande seostaceaetguencissibabetapeussssexanetnstesaenies 45 
USING THE.1B-502D DIGITAL INTERFACE 5 icsssssrsiexticasesssiseustastadessvaneracinssaauacsoncseseness 45 
EDIT 1-=7T RIM, LOOP AND JOIN by visiccscssscecautenacssvensicessccczaasswavadencrdaceuszh scuosaceubasetivansienes 47 
TRINMIMUING SAMPLES osc snscsisecscuscndcenseanancesncsssaisndabonseuadenesuunvenselaimnekaadrensussesuncewans 47 
BDO ING ap eaisccaccsoavcsiasesbenunsias sa slaceuausacashpesatecenivieecucuveaesasseeones taansapiasvapnontadenssnauts 49 
MARKING AGOGO LOOP oii spucdareisicasasecs tulensssadanensedenunnencsuistesucesasssusaswataebeseiuaesasinn 51 
PERE TUN PAGE cps erase tai cessane spinainvtwanven senionuassiaessiniassasevetivabastaacundedabisiasgauscaaneaiiwess 53 
SPACING SIMIP EBS jc tusccgscinvashaucexcusdcenepevecuaiusiussconecueus suurtscaverscussakeseeessseassvomancics 3 
Ta IN aursnnsaabn seta deren vasnaacaetarnivsassaceceunsesniaraceca erin enamine ene 54 
MIXING AND LAYERING SAMPLES cssicvsccesesusdsiertndousotensssencesuiaveossdeneueaeudsaseasteelss 54 
EDIT 2.= TIMESTRETCH AND RE-SAMPEE isis sisscoviicnsicecevaaecssisaietiivesciacticvasivecsevesdtebecse 55 
THE PARAMETER PAGE - TUNING AND REVERSING SAMPLES...........c00ccceeeeeeeeees 55 
BOE ¥ ERRSIING SO AIVEE BED ssisazesascccrantnacisdveasbaqaeueis sacks tux spstusdéraancsiveaptasananeatenseincenaeaies 56 
UVR EE ARTE Ue aye been Vena cess ean sachin ide S anaes peas nego en peed te ei eese cass tesvas uns ereeaasees 56 
TAMES TIRE VCH PARA I Cio unccspcanssccasss oiirtecvaprsscaesavarssagissalaa aceaestoeasstestieadaee 58 
PERFORMING A TIMES PRET CA icsscssspesisncacsvarsebssanevabiansoinensxvessisineiecietenssiiuecedeasan 59 
RE SAMPLING 5 sais sisscissccounsisdasecinntacupctivenavcesisan tens rccuseseensaansueedbanas sash taricvesevexeunciose 60 
PERFORMING A: RE-SAMPUES cscsccciceiinninsensvacesicaxcaessccviebeugeuessadyeteraeeetecesemecnaviotens 61 
EDIT 3 - SECTIONAL EDITING, NORMALISATION, DIGITAL FADES .....................04. 62 
LEVEL SCALING/NORMALISA TION assiccdcacsighsssviacsasspeescsuceatesceeiegetsisncouecscassonvesers 64 
te ONSET AL PA riczhcctict sicsscvacucidesesadauyapeacdactayaniascensthpusesaiavtacivesvaseteadexas 66 
RINGS SURE vicaxesced. scan soakncaveretaces it lipceesupsaned va vecnaunts cooaseakeunsteueiasdy savxeiasenbaceasinn ti taxavgecuion 67 
BI Be I ya rhs rte cadences cesta dence eo dees ea een aeeacecntunyed iw pan attcddea a oeaeieaatcceeceess 68 
bg oa 8 i OW oo 4 80) |e, 1, bape mee nr PRES Ste EP NAT ETI oP R CRA one nD ET eC n TY erence 68 
IFS PA y eh EINE © ois aan tones cecacaacraenncesanneanesd ab aeadaelemeaavcoxetahawuncitscamerestecateipncdeys 68 
IE VGROUP ZINES ecaceesiecudensyxececerassvasnsacisrcestnaasacisannwn ts tassesiueskatesanisaeestaseaeneaaiaceeies 69 
OVERLAPPING AND CROSSFADING KEY GROUPS esssnsesiscdssevcxscsdeadecutes vetoes tracncssarnsves 70 
ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION oiiecsicdcsssuntspvassvevinelecevecexsecinvepeevadaeceusuiuseserese 71 
BENT BLOCK. DIAGRAM sscsesssiavscirsansesnncsxsntscny bbapersehauvaannsncsdhgseussteeecessunsauenenescesies 72 
CREATING AND EDITING A. PROGRAM fisesscisschccsececnnctssccvdasscnistsaetansdacitensemnevanceseanensas 76 
NAMING PROGRAMS - COPYING AND RENAMING ......0......ccceceeecceeeceeeceeeeeeeeseeeees 76 
DOBLE PING F ROGAN isiicisecassiseae Ie nsasoastacsonsaantsipnatenesoanrendsavacaaeseeubiaipuangareseusveniee 77 
MAIN PROGRAM BIDE PA siessacidecsssnnscascscayteaeisscussvisotacsedenes cotsdsaracesisesegnataatebesgnestens 78 
INE Ge aaa ai uaa ccs apes taste yatta vara nc cera eeu ad ou oom ob CHE PEA Da ae Pua eg ean NaN Nadie Reaper es 81 
OUTPUT VES PAGE siecece ss iccicxs eecksenccpedaceisncendeauprecdpeanisceapinsseeesereapesntedanarseat 83 
PAIN INGI: sie cp ancl bnpsdnsapcaedasseavtnangaceresaevia we caaensaancieacewags hoakearakshsnansqavenseapuaevidles wien 86 
PIE, FUN PAG ug sis cis satesnsesscasdenconsessaunscsnnseccxpyaesundenanansepseacaacasesaavgsseteswnieusnes Genus 88 
OIE III PAGES cesascraynavavisectss os tydnrnceanarinderssaepeaceareans van eeu rete one aan eataenes 89 
Dele LOW FREQUENCY OSCILLATORS isccccccesnscts scueseceaapiae doseseavasceacapouisousvacsaseiees 90 
SETTING LIOL MODULATION DEPTA, wcissescotecscveredexineniusiasscexeucsstqeaetasesereseskanyesise 93 
LP? vcs sucecassunaitvencdweneawnaashiecnenssacausaesavaviessddueicnedesd eaanbsokesastanusduksaegarereeepeerucstiaannads 94 
ee URGE IE LR OUP FPA os ere cause snngesuesseaicenievonnsuiedeycieehsvavatecacaucoanereleuieinaaenses 95 
KEYGROUP PARAMETERS - CREATING KEYGROUPSG ..............ccccssssssessssseccccccecscsesees 96 
MAPPING OUT YOUR KEYGROUPS - SETTING KEYSPAN 0. ssssosssssccsenciessecdxsrceeesevss 97 
ASSIGNING SAMPLES TO KEYGROUPS AND ZONES - SMP1 ............cccsececeeeceeeeeeeees 99 

DIE © idaccnsicasaceancnaniaays asians ccawssavaasatni penaudecenedeaeawastuiaaue A earennaatap eaten denen guesuen 101 


Version 1.0 10/92 





PEN sisacastisatas stsasteacdrscaoiasca tance sccdcas Aniaeststeictenise ne anencas ets nese ats eiaciona 103 

Fe a aicaensdehesrcrcnsicaratectnccatntowanns ence tien icv axccnieinercaannaenien eles 104 

BITES AOE TUE GATOR pekictscectiticeehiciceeen inne aatmeiemsinws 106 

THE ENVELOPE GENERATORS ...........ccccssssssscecceccscsecccssesscsccecessesscecscescescssccsseeess 107 

VT = SHEA RT aici dsvecsevesinacenrnaessicnssneiivesndiacatuusiinuisinitucmisannnsvies 107 

TVS = SEA PINs TIE PAE Ie da csceasaiccihicassinacasncesansah cis ecasbenneeekenseamcctablineeeardeeens 109 

USING THE FILTER AND ENVELOPE GENERATORS. ...........ccccccsssssceececcccecsssesceceeeee 110 

KEYGROUP PITCH/AMPLITUDE MODULATION ............ccccscsssssececceseceesceccceeseseeecees 111 

ee panics sree celpae octesa ct iriemcsctncc aor oni pvesacedetadeeti acum te ids danisenmesaneemenbaeatndins 113 

BIN asic sc sstpn heaseauiatce er eascustscenis lise csrndia asa cds eer tecaleans aoeasen tat has dealt ica nasheed easesemapcRa ele edad asada cgibntadatca tien. 114 
BETTE FG SR seavirtirnsdes aden tiaSiaveceaaie ic sikunspaverneeeiin secant iienisacea its 114 

PPM PAGE - MONITORING MIDI .....................ccccccscccccccscccccccccccccsccccccccscccsccscescccccccescces 115 

MIDI RECEIVE PAGE - ANALYSING MIDI....0.0.............. cece ce cecceccecscessccececcscecccceccccecesees 116 
TRANSMIT TEST PAGE - SETTING THE ENT/PLAY KEY .00.............0ccccceeseesececeeeseeceeees 117 

UE Ek Pi: RE Oo oacicsd Gssnsvicbaseeeexeeescccsssuteb nian ate enan iar end venretaie 117 

er Ee Fu EE CA Eu NRCIINNE cihaveax ce sannins Cavinsikccendesdiwnawanaedinsededceusubssibdaetantaadassiucs 118 
I ae creas cca uascan tee ncccnsariees ita wasesinas lad ined ccna onicmianstatateetduaieuasaaises 118 

BN FE yc ciantesercguica es uiseastae nacre untaasted wiseuscn en cae pdecaddo sasha tasteless dahtiomhiccaccascinies Masini axcnbemtedebedusbasisioneiins ss 120 
FEN Ree BE Bak ieccirrcaznaczacinacandduncsinncétudswiahh sattaeeusudieivessiinkch vatican dbiseaeneineiiawe 120 
LOADING S900/S950 SAMPLES AND PROGRAMS. ....0.........ccccssssssccccsssceccccsssscecccecsececees 122 

PAF EP ER ar RCI ES ees Dake vacteisiceerase cas gees an aacidthadcasiveaaaiReeesacicninite el bdedsladaains 123 

PA EOS BUD BUS ciscicciincnicsanismdovdeanducaea eonbanvacncs cand enue tisiuaddnssiveusaiscinveusiituistnddeseoumeasiieains 123 
POPS sia ici acca ceeceaceiceceanedansdiicenaia oxenetbactcansaveced stk sae een 125 

TPE ROR 1 Le POE COUR. Sine cnicmrioiettatiotintedunnnsdinbainledseiucisatiin Gateeses 126 

Ae Dna is EE achat Cadaace psctiohacuiacansiuxts tate ta cacinianaidaasbaeutadeiaa lata aeacniinlesmebcebialveds 126 
CONNECTING AN EXTERNAL HEAD DISK DRIVE .00... cece .c.ceeeececececcccesseeeeeccceeeeseeeeeees 127 
RE he te eo occa inva pboncisuacescovnancancenan nde ndcausnaniaves sid caxansvinesuedeusiatiecsniuedmiulkeeccinies 128 
AT TI A PUA UN Bi iceskcs crecdeccdcnsstaccsenaiarkensevsxnrnssniwsanadicaesnekexcsaneiies 129 

PRAIRIES A TEAR USE ssn tacccncnecesn Sah cievecanetvarns eaicbwdviataaaadssiaindiaibadias 130 

NOTES ON USING EXISTING $1000/S1100 SOUND LIBRARY ............ccccccccccceeseeseeseeees 131 
PARAMETER SEEPS wise siscicssccsccsséscucasespnskaasncicevedieinaatysensbocdsipismicconirveteaveseries 132 

pa) ry OR 2 ot Ch re ee re ee ee ns Set earn hae eee 133 
ge ee ee NS El be, Stone ea ee Tana ene aan eater en 133 

SE Le TELE. 2000S BAAS Fr CT LE VEU ioicssiccaiicrcstinsiircicardercvceercidasticinkass 133 

Oe WR UT PAP coca cncnaicrusaieaciaviscaass ass doves adic eccccten sioed cates eam usa adas wcan cdc ieee cena 134 
PROGRAMMING THE AKAIT ME3B ST ............ccseccecccssccsccscccsccsccesccescesccccsccceccsscesescccescecces 134 

Eh akc RU ee RO PR seein cares neeatvan htaccess ca eceadtadiedeaicaieks 136 

PAE TE Er reais sida cc ss oscecnicnpiceabuasoncesuteebdvatcawcaecaees 136 

A Re scat san ucta ceed necrracsa cuentas an euieoaederupseesiemaarsarevinion baamaacemiion 137 

PIC es A PO UO casita cs crea riciartanencsindesse cider adakinoncnianadns 137 

PERPORMING A DAT RESTORE, iciiisscsccceia cece cacsdlinavekitveticateassahcccsccecceonsasaizcacbonciie 138 

ee ee BN Pe Ce sa ienietiadacedsrs cei aacedccesaed sisi ec esaaid doniadaincas ceanninelediainiecaioals 139 
RRM Pe PN Bac da cesieewpscadci ac cvs nicsidetses taseuicbsnones Gaascit nd con cdchicite bain depmcsiabisehecbues tes sca ogden acta needa mnaiaasanaiinds 140 
PORE Se ee Le re UN Ft aspieteeciaes rican innmaanntd aba 143 
oS fy SAR DE, 5 eee ae OREN CCR D Te ee ane ae ae en ee 144 


Version 1.0 10/92 


INTRODUCTION 1 





INTRODUCTION 


Congratulations on purchasing the Akai S2800 sampler! The S2800 is a high 
performance stereo digital sampler with the following features: 


* 


Polyphony: 32 voices 

A-D conversion: 16-bit stereo with 64-times oversampling 
Internal processing: 28-bit accumulation 

D-A conversion: 18-bit with 8-times oversampling (L/R outs) 


18-bit with 8-times oversampling (ind outs) 
Sampling rates: 44.1kHz/22.050kHz 
Phase locked stereo sampling and playback 


Internal memory: 2 Megabytes - expandable to 16 Megabytes 
(254 programs/255 samples/1,022 ‘items’) 


Sampling times: 2 Meg: 22.28 seconds (mono/44.1kHz) 
11.14 seconds (stereo/44.1kHz) 
44.56 seconds (mono/22.050kHz) 
22.28 seconds (stereo/22.050kHz) 

16 Meg: 2.97 mins (mono/44.1kHz) 

1.48 mins (stereo/44.1kHz) 
5.94 mins (mono/22.050kHz) 
2.97 mins (stereo/22.050kHz) 


Internal effects: Stereo flanging, chorus, multi-tap delay, 
delay, pitch shifter 

Inputs: Stereo balanced jack inputs (L/mono+R) 

Outputs: LEFT/RIGHT outs (2 x unbalanced jacks) 


Assignable individual polyphonic outs 
(2 x unbalanced jacks) 


circuitry to avoid earth loops 
Stereo Headphone output jack 
Display: 40x8 character LCD 
Option for IB-302D AES/EBU digital interface with real-time digital outputs 
Multi-timbral over 16 MIDI channels 
Internal mixer with variable effects send 
Control of up to 2 x Akai ME35T audio/drum pad to MIDI converters 
12dB/octave resonant filters 
2 Envelope generators (1 multi-stage) 


2 x Low Frequency Oscillators 


Version 1.0 10/92 


2 INTRODUCTION 





* 


* 


Version 1.0 10/92 


Single triggering legato playback mode 


ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION (APM) - The ability to freely assign 
the following control sources: 


Envelope 1, Envelope 2, LFO 1, LFO 2, Mod wheel, Pitchbend, 
Aftertouch, Velocity, Key position, Definable external MIDI controller 


to the following destinations: 


Filter cutoff frequency, Amplitude, Pan position, Pitch, LFO rate, LFO 
depth 


in mixable and invertable amounts. 
Editing functions: 
EDIT SAMPLE: 


Trim, Chop, Cut, Extract, 4 Loops, Xfade looping, Auto looping, Join, 
Merge, Xfade, Gain rescale, Gain normalise, Reverse, Timestretch, Re- 


sample. 
EDIT PROGRAM: 


APM, resonant filters, 2 envelope generators (1 multi-stage) with 
envelope templates, 4 way velocity switch/xfade, 2 x LFO's, panning, 
single trigger legato playback mode, held pitchbend mode, microtonal 
tuning (with templates) 


EFFECTS: 


CHORUS: rate, depth, feedback, pan, stereo spread, output 
level, HF cut. 

MULTI-TAP DELAY: delay times, feedback, pan, HF damping, stereo 
spread, output level, HF cut. 


DELAY: delay time, feedback, LFO rate, LFO depth, pan, 
output level, HF cut 
PITCH SHIFT: tune, feedback, (independent for left/right), delay, 


pan, stereo spread, output level, HF cut 


Compatible with S900/S950/S1000/S1100 sound library disks, some library 
disks may need to be edited, depending on the voice. 


Using the IB-301S SCSI interface option, a variety of hard disk devices may be 
used including hard disk, Magneto Optical disks, CD ROM units, Syquest 
removable cartridges. 


INTRODUCTION 3 





* Back-up to DAT of hard disks and internal memory via the optional IB-302D 
digital interface 


* HELP pages 


* Open software architecture expansion via software updates 


The staff at Akai and in particular, the S2800 development team would like to thank 
you for purchasing the S2800 and hope that you will remain a long time Akai user. The 
same team who developed the industry standard S1000 and S1100 samplers are 
responsible for the S2800 and we are confident that your investment will provide you 
with many years of reliable service. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


4 $2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 





$2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 


3.5” HD 

FLOPPY INPUT OUTPUT 
POWER DISK DATA ENTRY LEVEL LEVEL 
SWITCH DRIVE 40x68 LCD ENCODER CONTROL CONTROL 


PROBS IN PeaeRY CC uol! MJT MaED> 
* 1 TEST Prose rot ass) 


l now active 





HEADPHONE LCD CONTRAST MODE ‘SOFT CURSOR NUMERIC 
OUTPUT  CONTROLend SELECT KEYS KEYS KEYPAD 
LCD BACKLIGHT KEYS 
ON/OFF SWITCH 
Although the S2800 has a fairly sparse front panel, behind it is a powerful tool for the 
Creative manipulation of digital audio. However, despite the creative power at your 
disposal, the S2800 is extremely easy to use. 


THE MODE SELECT KEYS 


The S2800 is run from 7 illuminated MODE SELECT KEYS that run along the bottom 
of the control panel. These keys call up different modes of operation which are from 
left to right: 


SELECT EDIT EDIT 
PROG/A SAMPLE/B PROG/C 


aww, Te rere 


bei Gd BBB: 


MIDI/D 





TUNE 
LEVEL/F 


UTILITY/G HELP/H 





SELECT PROG/A In this mode you may select programs for playback. Programs 
can be selected from the numeric keypad, the DATA control 
or, of course, via MIDI program change. In this mode you may 
also set up multi-timbral assignments for sequencing and you 
may layer programs. You also have access to the S2800's 
mixer and effects section. A simple disk load function is 
available for quick loading of data from disk. 


EDIT SAMPLE/B This mode is where you do all your sampling and sample 


editing. Here you may tune, trim, loop, join, merge, re-sample 
and timestretch samples. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


$2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 5 





EDIT PROG/C 


MIDI/D 


DISK/E 


TUNE LEVEL/F 


UTILITY/G 


THE HELP KEY 


This mode is where you assemble your ‘raw’, edited samples for 
playback from your MIDI controller. Here you set key ranges 
for the samples and you may access the S2800's resonant 
filters, apply envelopes, modulation, level, tuning, velocity 
switching and crossfading, microtonal tuning, etc.. 


This sets the S2800's ‘global’ MIDI parameters such as receive 
channel, program change select, etc.. There are also various 
diagnostic pages that allow you to view incoming MIDI signals 
in case of some problem. 


This mode is where you may load and save data to and from 
disk. You may use it to access floppy disks and a variety of 
hard disk units. Files may also be deleted from disk in this 
mode. 


This mode allows you to tune the sampler and set its operating 
output level. 


The UTILITY mode gives you access to the ME35T 
programming pages. In this mode, too, you may access the 
DAT back-up functions. 


The final key in this row is not a mode select key but a HELP function. 


HELP/H 


THE SOFT KEYS 


The help screens give you the most relevant section of the 
manual when the cursor is resting on a particular field. To get 
help, when the cursor is on a field you don't quite understand, 
press the HELP button. The help key locks and displays the 
text on the screen. To discover the function of one of the 
soft keys, press the HELP key (it will first display information 
about the current parameter) and then press the particular 
function key you are interested in. Its function will be 
described on the LCD. Pressing the HELP key again will turn 
the function off. 


ma wz F8/P 


Ooccgecooon0 


The soft keys directly under the LCD call up various functions and pages within each 
mode - these vary from mode to mode and have no pre-defined function. as such, they 
cannot be easily explained here! there are many common keys in many of the functions, 
however, such as, for example, COPY, RENAME and DELETE which are always on F6, 
F7 and F8 in those pages where they appear. commands such as GO, and ABORT 
always appear on F7 and F8. There is also a convention to the type of functions available 


which is worth noting. 


lf akey has this highlighted type of display: then this signifies that pressing this key 
will take you to another page. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


6 S2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 





lf the key has this type of display: COPY] (i.e. the function simply has a box around it 
and is unhighlighted) then this signifies that the key is an ‘action’ key and will instigate 
some kind action such as SAVE, LOAD, DELETE, GO, ABORT, etc.. 


lf the key has no form of box around it and is not highlighted - i.e: REC2, then this 
indicates the page you are currently in although this is always shown in the top left 
corner of the display as well. This type of key switches between two types of display - 
pressing it once displays note names, pressing it again displays notes as MIDI note 
numbers. In EDIT SAMPLE, you may toggle between a sample point and millisecond 


display. 


If you are unsure of the function of any soft key, please use the HELP pages by 
pressing the HELP key followed by the soft key you are interested in. 


SELECTING PARAMETERS AND ENTERING DATA 


You move around the screen using the CURSOR KEYS and data is input either from 
the DATA ENTRY ENCODER or from the NUMERIC KEYPAD. You may move 
around within digit fields using the +/< and -/> keys found on the numeric keypad. 


On simple fields like filter cutoff, attack time, MIDI channel, etc., that have two digits, 
you may simply type in a two digit number - i.e. 23, 45, etc.. On such fields, you will 
find that the DATA ENTRY ENCODER will cover the whole range quite quickly so you 
may find that more convenient. The same is true of three digit fields. Turning it 
clockwise increases numeric values, and turning it counter-clockwise decreases these 
values. You may also use the +/< and -/> keys to position the cursor on the ‘tens’ or 
‘hundreds’ field to make more rapid changes. For non-numeric values (i.e. sample rates, 
sample type, loop type, etc.), turning the encoder will display all the options in order. 
Normally, there is no other entry procedure required; simply displaying the correct 
value of a parameter using the DATA encoder selects and stores it into the S2800’s 
memory. Our sound programmers at Akai usually use a combination of the numeric 
keypad and the DATA ENTRY ENCODER for speedy input of parameter values. 


When editing numeric parameters, some of the values can be quite large, and it would 
be necessary to turn the DATA ENTRY ENCODER thousands of times (literally!) in 
order to go through the whole range if the value was only changed by 1 for every 
click of the DATA control. There is an alternative to turning the control thousands of 
times, though. When you press the CURSOR keys, you move from one parameter to 
another and, using the +/< and -/> keys, you may move around within a large numeric 
field. 


lf a number such as 123456.78 is displayed, and the +/< key is pressed so that only 
the first three digits are highlighted thus: 


FeS456.78 


turning the DATA ENTRY ENCODER clockwise by one step now will increase the 
value of the last highlighted digit, so: 


FREMS6.78 

Now if the -/> key is pressed once, the first four digits will be highlighted: 
EREEDSG.78 

and turning the DATA ENTRY ENCODER one click clockwise will produce: 
PREEH<.78 


Version 1.0 10/92 


$2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 7 





lf you turn the DATA contro! more than ten clicks, of course, the value of the whole 
parameter will be incremented or decremented by the number of clicks. In this way, 
with very little effort, fast accurate editing of numbers can be achieved using only the 
+/< and -/> keys and the DATA ENTRY ENCODER. The best way to learn how this 
works is to practise; after a short time, it should become second nature. 


On ‘signed’ fields - that is, fields that have a + or a - before them, the +/< and -/> will 
two things. Pressing the +/< key will move the cursor left within the field and, when 
it reaches the furthermost left digit, you may use it to switch between + and - 
depending on the selection you wish to make. The -/> key will move the cursor right 
and, when it reaches the furthermost right digit you may toggle between + and - 
again. 


As mentioned above, as an alternative to turning the DATA control, you can also use 
the numeric keypad for direct entry of data. When you know the exact number you 
want to enter, this can be faster than using the DATA control, but when 
experimenting (for example, when setting loop points or sample start and end times), 
the DATA control may be faster than the numeric keypad. You'll probably discover 
quickly what method works best for you in each situation. 


NOTE: The cursor always stays on the last currently selected field in any screen. For 
example, if you are in, say, the filter pages and are setting envelope 2's depth and 
then go to the ENV2 page to make an adjustment there, when you return to the filte 
page, the cursor will still be on envelope 2's depth parameter. 


The other remaining front panel keys are found to the right of the numeric keypad and 
are: 


MARK AND JUMP KEYS 


These two grey buttons to the right of the number keypad are used in conjunction 
with each other. If you are carrying out editing operations which require changing 
display pages a lot, these can save a lot of time and effort. Pressing the MARK/# 
button when the cursor is on a field will cause the $1000 to remember the position of 
the cursor, and pressing JUMP’. will take the cursor back to the MARK(ed) position 
from any other page. Pressing JUMP/. again will take you back to the page and 
function you were at before you JUMP(ed). 


You can reset the MARK position at any time. This position is lost when the power is 


turned off. At power-on, this position defaults to the program select field in the initial 
SELECT PROG page. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


8 $2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 





NAMING FILES - THE NAME KEY 


When samples, programs, effects or drum input settings are changed, they should be 
given a name for easy reference. Pressing the NAME button in certain pages will 
enable you to name the data and you will notice that each button has a letter following 
its primary function (i.e. EDIT PROG/C, F4/L, HELP/H). Up to 12 characters 
(uppercase only) are entered by pressing the front panel buttons (although you may 
also scroll through letters and numbers using the DATA control). When actually 
entering names, pressing the NAME button will switch the function of the numeric 
keypad between letters and numbers. The CURSOR keys moves the cursor around 
inside the name field when naming a sample or program. 


When entering names in letter mode, the +/< and -/> buttons work as backspace and 
spacebar buttons respectively (when in number mode, they enter the "+" and "-" 
characters), and the MARK/# and JUMP’. keys enter "#" and "." respectively. The last 
button, ENT/PLAY, enters and confirms the name and the S2800 prompts you to 
either copy or rename the item. 


THE ENT/PLAY KEY 


This is a dual-purpose button. When naming samples, programs, etc, pressing this 
button will end the naming process in conjunction with COPY and REN(ame) as 
described above. In other modes of operation, this key will play the sound at a pitch, 
velocity and MIDI channel as set in the MIDI TRAN(smit) page in the MIDI mode. The 
default may be freely set as you wish. 





THE DISK DRIVE 
The 3.5 inch floppy disk drive will accept high density and low density disks . 


Disks are inserted into the drive thus: 


DISK ACTIVITY LED DISK EJECT BUTTON 





WRITE PROTECT TAB HIGH DENSITY 
DETECTION TAB 


Version 1.0 10/92 


$2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 9 





The label should be facing upwards when it is inserted (actually, it is physically 
impossible to insert disks the wrong way round without using an extreme amount of 
brute force!). 


To eject the disk, simply press the DISK EJECT button. When a disk is loading, saving 
or formatting, the DISK ACTIVITY LED will be lit. 


IMPORTANT NOTE: On the $1000 and S1100, it is possible to format low density 
(DD or double density) disks to a high density format. This is not possible on the 
S2800. Furthermore, the S2800 cannot read DD disks that have been formatted on 
an S1000/1100 to a high density format. You will need to first load these sounds into 
an S1000/1100, resave them onto high density disks (formatted to high density, o 
course) before they can be used in the S2800. High density disks have a hole on the 
right hand side which is used by the disk drive to detect that it is a high density disk. 
If the S2800 does not ‘see’ this hole, it assumes it is a DD disk and so searches for a 
DD format. If it doesn't find it (i.e. because the disk is high density format), it cannot 
read it. 











It is important to remember that, unlike a synthesizer, the S2800 has no means of 
storing sounds in an internal memory. The amount of data involved in audio samples 
would make the cost of battery backed up RAM prohibitively expensive. As a result, it 
is vital that you Save your work to disk before turning the power off otherwise you 
will lose your work and, unless previously saved or backed up, it will be gone for ever. 
In fact, it is a good idea to regularly save your work as you are working. All good 
computer users do this and it prevents the accidental loss of data should power be 
accidentally removed from the instrument. This also serves as a form of ‘undo’ - if you 
make some kind of mistake in your programming and editing and can't fix it, you can 
load the last level of editing back into the sampler. It may be a bit tedious to keep 
stopping every now and then to save your work but it is better than losing some 
valuable sounds. 


TAKING CARE OF YOUR DISKS 


These floppy disks contain valuable sound data and, as such, should be treated with 
extreme care. Please observe the following points, therefore: 


1 Never slide the metal cover back and touch the disk. Finger marks may render 
the disk unreadable. 


2 Don't leave the disk in the drive wherever possible. When the disk is in the 
drive, the metal protective cover slides back exposing the actual disk inside - this 
makes the disk susceptible to picking up dust which may cause read errors. 


3 Do not leave your disks in a hot car. 


4 Do not place your disks next to any magnetic sources such as speakers, 
amplifiers, televisions, etc.. Also, try to avoid X-ray machines. At airports, it is 
sometimes possible to ask for your disks to be inspected by hand at security 
desks but, with the added security at airports these days, this may not be 
possible. Always check with the security officer though, just in case. Security X- 
ray machines are generally safe with disks, though. If in doubt, make backup 
copies which should be left at home. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


10 §2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 


5 Do not leave your disks around when drinking liquids - one accidental spillage 
could ruin a lot of work! 


6 Always use high quality disks. Whilst cheap ones may be appealing, they are 
prone to errors more than good ones. 


rf Try to ensure that the write protect tab is switched on (i.e. the tab blocks the 
hole). This will prevent accidental erasure, formatting and loss of data. It may be 
a nuisance to try to write to the disk and find it write protected but it is less of a 
nuisance than accidentally over-writing a set of your favourite samples and 
programs! 


8 Try to get into the habit of labelling your disks - it will pay dividends in the end 
when you are searching for something. 


9 Invest in a sturdy carrying case for your floppies especially if you are a gigging 
musician. Heavy duty metal camera cases are ideal and some flight case 
manufacturers now make special heavy duty disk flightcases. 


10 Even if you are using a hard disk of any sort, please make sure you have backed 
up your work to floppy disks. It can be time consuming but it will be worth it if 
you ever have a problem with your hard disk! 


AND FINALLY... 
LCD CONTRAST 


You may adjust the viewing angle for the screen using the DISPLAY CONTRAST 
controi. 


NOTE: To preserve the life of your LCD, this control also has a switch which you can 
use to turn the backlight of the LCD on or off. At times when you are not actively 
using the S2800's front panel for programming (i.e. when actually sequencing or 
recording to tape, for example, or when using the sampler live on stage), you might 
like to switch this off. All LCD's of this type progressively get dimmer with age and 
this switch can help prevent this. The switch should be pushed in to switch the 
backlight off and pushed in again to switch it back on. 


RECORD LEVEL, MAIN OUTPUT LEVEL, HEADPHONE OUTPUT 
Input level for sampling is regulated using the RECORD LEVEL CONTROL and the 
S2800's overall output level is controlled, not surprisingly, by the MAIN VOLUME 


control. This also governs the level of the sound appearing at the HEADPHONE 
OUTPUT. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


$2800 FRONT PANEL DESCRIPTION 11 





FOOTSWITCH INPUT 


The FOOTSWITCH input is actually two switch inputs using a stereo jack. One input is 
used for sustain and for initiating sampling (See later) and the other is used for the 
soft pedal (MIDI controller 67). The wiring of the plug is as follows: 


RING - SOFT PEDAL 


i TIP - SUSTAIN/SAMPLING 


GROUND 


Both require a press-to-open type of switch. 


If you have used or owned an S1000 or S1100, the biggest difference you will 
probably find is the use of cursor keys as a method of getting around the screen. As a 
result of our success with the Akai DD1000 Magneto Optical Disk Recorder/Editor, 
these have proved to be a very convenient way of moving the cursor around the 
screen and so replace the cursor knob found on the older samplers. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


12 THE REAR PANEL 








THE REAR PANEL 


The rear panel consists mainly of input and output connectors. 


OUTPUTS FOOTSWITCH 


AKA! ELECTRIC CO, LTD 
afte we 


ANALOGUE INPUTS GAIN SWITCH EXPANSION PANELS MIDI CONNECTIONS POWER 


FOR OPTIONS 


ANALOGUE OUTPUT CONNECTIONS 


There are four audio connectors provided - a LEFT/RIGHT pair of outputs and two 
individual outputs. The simplest way to connect the S2800 to a mixer or amplification 
system is to use the LEFT/MONO and RIGHT stereo connectors (if you want to make 
mono connections, use the LEFT/MONO connector only). 


Use of the INDIVIDUAL OUTPUTS (CH1/CH2) allows much more flexibility and 
control. Programs can be assigned to any one of these output channels (true stereo 
programs using stereo samples should be assigned to the stereo outputs for the full 
stereo effect) and effected separately. 


The S2800 uses remote ground sensing circuitry so that the unbalanced outputs are 
protected against the possibility of ground or earth loops that can sometimes occur in 
complicated setups where a lot of equipment is connected. 


ANALOGUE INPUTS 


GAIN 


A pair of balanced connectors are provided for connection of sound sources using 
stereo jack sockets. Unbalanced sources can, of course, be connected. If a mono 
source is used for sampling, use only either the LEFT (MONO) phone connector. 


SWITCH 


This is a 3-position slider switch (LOW, MID, HIGH) used for matching the level of the 
input source to the recording amplifier of the S2800. Fine adjustment should be 
carried out with the REC LEVEL control on the front panel. Ideally, you should set 
the REC GAIN so that the REC LEVEL is set about 2 o’clock. Remember that unlike 
analogue equipment, digital devices produce distortion which is particularly unpleasant, 
and “soft clipping” and the effect of saturation found in analogue recordings cannot 
be obtained when recording digitally. You should always allow sufficient headroom for 
transient peaks when making a sample. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


THE REAR PANEL 13 





Note also, that recording at too low a level will not allow you to make full use of the 
$2800's dynamic range and signal to noise figures. 


NOTE 1: When making a sample, you may not immediately notice any clipping that 
may have resulted from incorrect level settings and it may only become apparent when 
playing back samples lower than the original pitch at which they were sampled. 


NOTE 2: If you set the level too low, the S2800's EDIT SAMPLE pages have a 
GAIN NORMALISE function that allows you to restore the sample to its optimum 
level for full use of the sampler's wide dynamic range. 





The REC GAIN sensitivities are HI -58dBm, MID -38dBm, LOW - 18dBm. 
MIDI IN, OUT, THRU 


These MIDI connectors conform to the usual MIDI standard. IN is used to receive 
MIDI from your keyboard, sequencer or audio/MIDI trigger unit or alternative MIDI 
controller such as the Akai EWI wind synthesizer as well as for accepting System 
Exclusive data. MIDI OUT is used for transmitting Note On/Note Off and 
performance (pitch bend, aftertouch, etc) data, as well as for System Exclusive 
communication. MIDI THRU echoes the data received at the MIDI IN terminal and is 
the connection usually used when ‘chaining’ several pieces of MIDI equipment 
together. 


EXPANSION SLOTS 
Inside the S2800 are two slots for optional interfaces that include the IB-302D digital 
audio interface, and the IB-301S SCSI interface. These panels are removed to 
accommodate these options when fitted. 

POWER CONNECTION 


This is used to connect AC power to the S2800. 


BEFORE CONNECTING ANY AC POWER, PLEASE ENSURE THAT 
YOUR UNIT IS DESIGNED FOR YOUR AREA'S POWER SUPPLY. A 


MISTAKE NOW COULD RUIN YOUR WHOLE DAY NOT TO MENTION 
YOUR $2800!!! 





Version 1.0 10/92 


14 SETTING UP THE S2800 





SETTING UP THE S2800 


This short section tells you how to get the S2800 “up and running” fast. For full 
details of other operations, refer to the appropriate explanation in this manual. 


CONNECTIONS 


Start by placing the S2800 on a firm level surface or in a 19" equipment rack. 
Remember to leave adequate space for airflow above and behind the S2800 if putting 
it in a rack (a 1U space is adequate). 


For now, you'll probably want to connect a MIDI controller, such as the AKAI 
MX1000 master keyboard. Connect a MIDI OUT of the controller to the S2800’s 
MIDI IN connector. The power-on default of the S2800 is MIDI channel 1 so please 
set your MIDI controller to match that. However, unless you want to play through 
headphones, make some audio connections. Using the LEFT/MONO and RIGHT 
stereo outputs will probably be sufficient at this stage, so connect these to two 
channels of a mixing console, and set the gain appropriately (the standard output 
level is 6.0dBm and the impedance is 600 ohms). If you are connecting the 
LEFT/RIGHT outputs to a mixer, set the pan pots for the mixer channels hard right 
and hard left so that you get the full benefit of the stereo capabilities of the S2800. 
Connect the power lead to the AC supply and to the S2800. 


TO MIXER INPUTS TO MIXER OR 
STEREO AMP 


a, ee, 


©0O soos scooseoosce 















MIDI IN 
MIDI OUT 
i AKAI 0 ont vw 
“i BBE {L_12) 09 0 pooooDoDo0 ~ 
ooo0 oooooo o ooooooooono 





HTT 


Version 1.0 10/92 


GETTING STARTED 15 





GETTING STARTED 


You are presumably now anxious to use your new acquisition so enough of this manual 
reading for the moment!! 


Assuming there is some form of MIDI controller connected to the S2800's MIDI input 
and assuming you have not yet switched the instrument on, insert one of the library 
disks that come with the S2800 into the 3.5" floppy disk drive (if you really are new 
to samplers, please have a quick !ook at the section INSERTING THE FLOPPY DISK 
in the introduction). 


With the disk in the drive, switch the S2800 on - it will automatically load the disk on 
power up. 


You will see some activity going on as the S2800 loads the sounds (the disk activity 
LED will light and a quick look at the LCD will show a "LOADING...." message. After 
about 40-50 seconds, this will stop - you may now play the S2800. 


The library disks supplied each come with several programs. These either use different 
combinations of samples or a variations on a set of samples. These may be selected 
from the S2800's front panel using the DATA encoder or alternatively, you may use 
MIDI PROGRAM CHANGE commands from your MIDI controller to select new 
programs. 


Once you have tired of the first disk you loaded, take another and insert it into the 
disk drive. Press DISK (F5) and VOL (F8) to load it. After 40-50 seconds, you should 
be able to play the sounds on that disk. Again, use the DATA encoder or MIDI 
program change to select the different programs. Repeat the process for the other 
disks. 


If, at this point, you want more sounds, aside from making them yourself (an easy 
enough process as we Shall see), please contact your dealer or Akai distributor who 
will be able to advise you from where and how you may obtain Akai or third party 
sound library. Of course, you may already have other sound library disks if you are an 
$1000 or S1100 user in which case you are probably not reading this section so why 
are we wasting time explaining this - you already know what to do!!! 


Version 1.0 10/92 


16 HOW THE S2800 WORKS 





HOW THE $2800 WORKS 


Despite its versatility, the S2800 is very straightforward and once you have a basic 
grasp of the flowcharts shown on the next pages, things will make more sense. 


Basically, you can have SAMPLES. These are the pieces of raw digital audio that are 
always the basis of any sound in the S2800. These may be derived from floppy disk, 
hard disk (including Magneto Optical (MO) Disks, removable cartridge types), CD 
ROM or, of course, you may sample your own sounds via the analogue or, if the 
IB-302D digital interface is fitted, via the digital inputs. 


Once you have a raw sample, there are many things you can do with it within EDIT 
SAMPLE. You may TRIM it - that is, remove any unwanted audio from the start or 
end. You may CHOP it - that is, remove a section in the middle and splice the two 
remaining sections together or you may CUT it - that is, remove a section in the 
middie and keep the gap thus created. You may also EXTRACT part of the sound - 
that is isolate a section (such as one snare drum in a breakbeat) and extract that 
snare hit from the original. You may also TUNE and/or REVERSE the sample. 


Of course, one problem always associated with sampling is LOOPING. Because any 
given sample is only a few seconds long, if you want to sustain that sample longer 
than its original length, some method has to be sought to do this. This is LOOPING. 
A loop is a section of the sound that repeats as long as you hold your finger on the 
key and is set by setting a start and end point for the loop. This is something of an 
art and a science and something we won't delve into here in great detail. To make 
looping as easy as possible, the S2800 has FIND and CROSSFADE functions to help 
you set good loops. 


Other sample editing functions include TIMESTRETCH which allows you to lengthen 
or shorten a sample without changing its pitch (again, we will look at this in more 
detail later in this manual) and RE-SAMPLING, a technique that allows you to squeeze 
the optimum performance out of available memory space. On the S2800, it is also 
possible to JOIN samples end to end to create long, evolving sounds or you may MIX 
samples to create big layered textures. You may also NORMALISE and RESCALE a 
sample's level for optimum signal to noise performance. 


Once you have edited a sample you may place it into a PROGRAM. 


A PROGRAM is where you assemble your sample(s) for playback. In EDIT PROG, you 
allocate a sample to a KEYGROUP (in fact, you can allocate 4 samples to one 
keygroup for layering, velocity switching and velocity crossfading but more on that 
later!). A program may have as little as one keygroup spanning the entire keyboard or 
as many as one keygroup for every key each with four samples in them! To overcome 
the abrupt tonal discrepancies sometimes experienced when two different samples are 
placed ‘side by side’ on the keyboard, positional kKeygroup crossfading can be used for 
a smoother transition. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


HOW THE S2800 WORKS. 17 





Once in a keygroup, the sample may be passed through resonant filters for tonal 
modification, through amplifiers for amplitude control and through a pan section for 
stereo placement. Keygroups may be freely assigned to the individual outputs for 
external processing on a mixing console. 


On top of this, you may apply modulation from Low Frequency Oscillators (LFOs) for 
vibrato and other effects. A SINGLE TRIGGER LEGATO mode allows you to emulate 
solo instruments such as woodwind and brass more realistically and to allow for 
greater expression when playing synth bass parts or lead sounds. 


One powerful feature of the S2800 is the flexible ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM 
MODULATION known as APM for short) in EDIT PROGRAM. Using this, any 
modulation source may be routed to virtually any control input. In this way, the S2800 
is a powerful synthesizer as well, except that you may use almost any sampled sound 
(of your own or from a sound library) as the basis of your own powerful and 
expressive sounds. 


Once you have placed your sample(s) into a program, you may play them from a MIDI 
controller. Programs may be sent in varying amounts to the S2800's internal effects 
and programs may also be layered or set to different MIDI channels for multi-timbral 
sequencing. In this application, the S2800's built-in mixer allows you to balance the 
various sounds together without needing to use up channels on your mixer (although 
the individual outputs do allow for external processing as well, don't forget). 


Once you are happy with that, the whole thing may be saved to disk for recall at a 
later date. 


One of the beauties of the Akai samplers is that there are no restrictions on what you 
do with samples - any sample can be placed into any keygroup in any program. One 
sample may be placed into a variety of different programs, each of which impose 
different envelope or filter settings to create a wide range of possibilities from very 
little. One or more samples may be used in any other programs even on other disks 
and/or one program can be used as the basis for processing other samples. 


$2800 FLOWCHART 


The following lowcharts will help your understanding of the S2800. 


= 


























INDIVIDUAL 
OUTPUTS 


Version 1.0 10/92 


18 HOW THE S2800 WORKS 





DETAILED DIAGRAM OF $2800 FUNCTIONS 


ANALOGUE INPUTS 
DIGITAL INPUTS 


FLOPPY DISK 
HARD DISK/CARTRIDGE 
CD ROM 





EDIT SAMPLE 


[ LOOP (X4)] | TUNE | 





SCALE | NORMALISE] FADE 
TIMESTRETCH . 





EDIT PROGRAM 








o. tae 
ae 
SS 
e 

: 


> 


KEYGROUP(S) | 


FX SEND 
TO INT IND. OUT 


7 EFFECTS 


~~ 
. 
x aa 





| PER KEYGROUP | PAT IND. OUTPUT ASSIGN] 
‘ne oan Ll 


MASTER AUTO 
OUTPUT ¥ PANNING 





: / MASTER 
_ [KEYSPAN __ENVELOPE TEMPLATES | licialieailiiialee: 





ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION SOURCES 


ee ee oe ew ee ee ee Ee ETE EERE Ee eee EEE EE EERE EE TEER EEE EERE SEE EE EEE Eee Eee eR EE Re ee ERE EE EEE EE EE EEE EEE EERE EEE EE EEE EEE EEE EE EERE EEE EEE EE EEE EEE EE EEE HEE E EEE EEE EEE EE EEE EEE EE EEE EE EEE EEE EEE EE EEE ESSE EEeE EEE ER ERE OEE EES 


Version 1.0 10/92 


SELECT PROG-19 





SELECT PROG 





CaS TS Cvol: VOLUME 020 







* 1 STRINGS 1 8 program(s) 
2 PIANO 1 now active 
3 BASS PROGRAM NUMBER: iY 
4 BIG KIT 
5S SYN BASS 






SLCT [X00 Ie DOIG! (GE RS ee (MUTE) 





This display shows the main SELECT PROG screen and here you may select and play 
programs. You may also set up sophisticated multi-timbral arrangements of programs 
for sequencing from MIDI and you may also perform layering and keyboard split 
techniques. Within this mode is a mixer for setting the levels, pan position and effects 
send of programs and here you may also access and program the effects section. You 
also have access to the disk operations for loading sounds. 


SELECTING PROGRAMS 


lf you have read the chapter GETTING STARTED, then you may already be familiar 
with selecting sounds on the S2800. This can be done in several ways: 


1 In the main SELECT PROG screen as shown above, turning the DATA control 
will select different programs for playback. 


2 In the main SELECT PROG screen, use the numeric keypad to select sounds by 
number. To do this, press the </+ key twice followed by a three digit number. l.e. 
to select program 25, press </+ and 025. To then select program 26, simply 
press 6. To then select program number 1, press </+ once followed by 01 or 
twice followed by 001. 


3 Send MIDI program change commands from your keyboard, synthesizer or 
whatever MIDI controller you are using. You will note that the S2800 uses 
‘actual’ program numbers 1-128 - if your keyboard sends out 0-127, please bear 
this in mind as you will have to offset all program change commends you issue 
by 1. 


Whichever method you use for selecting programs, when the program is selected, an 
asterisk appears alongside it number and the program number is indicated. One useful 
feature of the S2800 is that it is possible to be playing one program whilst another is 
being selected. For example, whilst holding down a low string note you could select, 
say, a brass sound. The strings will continue to Sound and you may now play the brass 
part. Please note, however, that if you are using the internal effects on either or both 
of these sounds, there may be a noticeable change as only one effect can be used at 
once. In this case, the brass program's effects would take priority. 


VIEWING PROGRAMS 


The LCD can display 5 programs at any one time. There may be occasions when you 
have more than this and so you may use the CURSOR keys to scroll through your 
program list. Pressing the CURSOR LEFT or RIGHT keys will scroll though the list 
one at a time and pressing the CURSOR DOWN or UP keys will increment through 
the list in steps of five programs. This can be helpful if you are searching for a 
particular sound and need to see what is loaded in the S2800. The display will tell you 
how many programs are loaded and in the above example, we can see that there are 
actually 8 programs in memory even though only the first five are displayed. It is 
possible to be viewing other programs whilst playing another. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


20 SELECT PROG 





RENUMBERING PROGRAMS 


On the S2800, program numbers correspond to patch numbers on a synthesizer. 
When a MIDI Program Change message is received, the appropriate program is 
selected. However, to match S2800 programs with the patch numbers on your 
synthesizer, you may want to renumber the programs, so that selecting a brass sound 
on the $2800 will call up a similar (or complementary) patch on a remote synthesizer 
module. To do this, press the key. You will receive something like this screen 


display: 


CHANGE FROSFHM HUMEER OF MEMORY FRioNS=, 
* BBY STRINGS 1 
2 PIANO 


3 BASS 
4 BIG KIT 
5 SYN BASS 

RNUM CALL 





As the screen informs you on this page, you select the program to be renumbered 
using the CURSOR keys and alter the current number to the new number using the 
DATA control. You can also use the numeric keypad for this, setting the program 
number to a value of between 1 and 128 (these are MIDI specification limits). When 
you have altered the number, you have several options to choose from on soft keys 6, 
7 and 8. These are: 


CALL) This will set all programs to the same number as that set in the 
currently selected program. For example, placing the cursor on 
3 BASS and setting that to 1 would renumber all the programs 
to program number 1. This is useful when you have loaded in a 
variety of sounds from different disks or hard disk volumes 
and wish to sequence them multi-timbrally (see later). 


This causes all subsequent programs to be renumbered with an 
offset to the currently selected program. For example, if you 
renumbered program 4 to 10, all subsequent programs (i.e. 
SYN BASS and others off the screen) will be renumbered 11, 
12, 13, etc.. whilst programs 1, 2 and 3 would be unaffected. 


This will only renumber the currently selected program. All 
other programs will be unaffected. You may also use this to 
renumber several programs in one go. For example, change 
the Programs accordingly (i.e. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.) and then 
press 


Once you are happy with the result of your renumbering, press to return you to 
the main SELECT PROG screen display. Also, if you change your mind and do not 
wish to renumber something now, simply leave the RNUM page without pressing F6, 
F7 or F8. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


SELECT PROG: 21 





MIXING SOUNDS ON THE $2800 


The S2800 is equipped with a ‘virtual mixer’ - that is, you can set up mixes of 
programs with any number of mixer ‘channels’. This is done in the MIX page of 
SELECT PROG. To access this, press EXRR@ME and you will receive the following display: 


prog no:MBY loud st pan send lev 
1 


* 1 STRINGS 1 80 99 MID 
2 PIANO 76 99 MID 


3 BASS 99 99 MID 
4 BIG KIT sp oe ae 
= SYN BASS 

Emad A Mix CO EN A CS UTE 





On this page you may set, from left to right across the screen: 


prog 


loud: 


SU? 


pan: 


send: 


No. 


This shows the number of the program selected in the main 
SELECT PROG page although you may select another 
program or group of programs in this field. 


This sets the overall level for the program as it appears at the 
stereo output AND the individual output and could be 
regarded as similar to the gain control on a mixer. Please note, 
however, that if this parameter is set to 99, then you will lose 
control over velocity sensitivity of loudness. The default is set 
to 80 which gives a healthy output level and a good degree of 
velocity sensitivity. 


This sets the level of the program as it appears at the left/right 
stereo outputs of the S2800. This would normally be used to 
mix the levels of different programs and is the equivalent of a 
mixers fader control. It is possible to send programs to 
individual outputs but, by mixing them out of the stereo 
Outputs by setting this parameter to 00, you remove them 
from the main mix. In this way, for example, you could send 
individual drums to separate channels of an external mixer for 
more elaborate level and tonal control whilst other instruments 
appear only at the stereo outputs of the S2800. In this way, 
very complex mixes can be set up. Another method may be to 
send, say, snare and kick to individual outputs (but take them 
out of the stereo mix) and just have toms and percussion in a 
stereo image coming out of the main stereo mix. In this way, 
you save on channels on your external mixer. 


This sets the pan position of the program in the stereo 
Outputs and the range is L50 through MID (00) to R50. 


This allows you to assign any program to one of the 2 
individual outputs should you wish to mix the program using 
an external mixer. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


22 SELECT PROG 


MIDI 





You may also select FX and you may use this to send programs 
in proportionate amounts to the internal effects and the lev: 
parameter explained next allows you to set the effects send 
level. 


lev: This sets the level of the audio appearing at the individual 
outputs. If FX is selected in the send: field described above, 
this control sets the effects send level to the internal effects. 


All these parameters are available for each and every program and in a layered or multi- 
timbral setup, you can set levels and effects sends very precisely and the biggest 
difference between the S2800's mixer and a ‘proper’, external mixer is that the 
S2800's mixer does not have any EQ facilities for affecting tone. If you feel this is 
necessary, then you may use the individual outputs to send certain programs to an 
external mixer for more elaborate level and tone control and, of course, it is possible 
to use a combination of the external mixer and the internal mixer using the individual 
outputs in conjunction with the main stereo output. 


Pressing F4 - EM - will display the following screen: 








higd prog no: MEY cha range pol pri tr 








* 1 STRINGS 1 1 C_O G_8 32 NORM +00 
2 PIANO 1 C_O G_8 32 NORM +00 
3 BASS 1 C_O G_8 32 NORM +00 
4 BIG KIT 1 C_0 G_8 32 NORM +00 
S ea. as 1 C_O G_8 32 NORM +00 






Bed 0) Ee M101 Se Se ee PT) 





This could be regarded as a ‘MIDI mixer’ as it follows a similar layout to the MIX page 
described above. This page allows you to set various MIDI parameters for each 
program. The parameters are: 


prog no: This shows the number of the program selected in the main 
SELECT PROG page although you may select another 
program or group of programs in this field. 


cha: This allows you to set the MIDI channel for any program and 
the range is OM (omni) through 1-16. This parameter allows 
you to layer programs together by setting two or more 
programs to the same program number and setting their MIDI 
channels the same in this field. It also allows you to set up 
sophisticated multi-timbral configurations (i.e. set several 
programs to the same program number and assign different 
MIDI channels to each program). You may also layer two or 
more programs within a multi-timbral configuration of course. 


range: When two programs are given the same program number, it is 
possible to set up keyboard splits by setting the note range of 
the programs. This parameter ignores each programs keygroup 
ranges and simply imposes a range on the whole program. In 


Version 1.0 10/92 


pol: 


pri: 


tr: 


SELECT PROG 23 





this way, you Can quickly set up very complex keyboard splits 
and layers without having to concern yourself with the 
intricacies of setting keygroups within a program itself. Please 
note that this parameter has no effect on single programs, it 
is only when two or more programs have the same program 
number that it is effective. 


This is an abbreviation of POLYPHONY and allows you to limit 
the polyphony of a program. This is sometimes desirable in 
certain types of programs such as hi-hats, for example, where 
you want a closed hi-hat to shut off an open hi-hat. In this 
case, you would set the polyphony to 1. Similarly, you may 
wish a monophonic bass part to have a restricted polyphony. 


This is an abbreviation of PRIORITY and allows you to set how 
notes will be ‘stolen’ by other programs if the 32 voice 
polyphony is exceeded. There are four settings: LOW, NORM, 
HIGH and HOLD. If the program is set to LOW priority, then 
notes from this program will be stolen first. If set to HIGH, 
then notes from other programs with lower priority will be 
stolen first before they are stolen from this program. NORM 
is, Of course, normal priority and sets standard dynamic voice 
allocation and note stealing will take place with no particular 
priority. lf a program's priority is set to HOLD, then notes can 
only be stolen from this program by the same program. 


If you are playing a complex piece of music using magy 
programs in a multi-timbral configuration, it is a good idea to 
set important programs to HIGH or HOLD and less 
important, background programs to LOW. If the piece of 
music is not overly complicated and polyphony is not going to 
be exceeded, you may prefer just to leave the priority at the 
default setting of NORM. 


This is an abbreviation of TRANSPOSE and sets the basic 
octave range for the program. The range is +/- 50 semitones. 
You will note that this is not a pitch shift function as such but 
a MIDI transpose function - this overcomes the problem of 
playing back samples out of their range. What this function 
does is introduce an offset so that, even if you play C3 on the 
keyboard, this is offset to play the samples on C4 (with a +12 
setting) - it is not playing the samples on C3 an octave higher. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


24 SELECT PROG 





DISK OPERATIONS 


The next key along, F5, gives you access to some basic disk functions for loading 
sounds into the $2800. Pressing I in the SELECT PROG mode gives you this 
screen: 












BT Oe Oe = ie eeees VOL: NOT NAMED 


STRINGS 1 

SOFT STRINGS programs: 8 
OCT STRINGS (samples: 6) 
SLOW STRINGS free mem: 100% 


PIZZA STRNGS rLOAD. 
Ss CE) Me CG DISK MGS CP+S) OL) 


Here, you have a choice of two options: loading a particular program and its 
associated samples LE+$] or loading the entire contents of the disk 


lf you have inserted a disk, pressing EZ@3H will bring up a list of all programs stored 
on that disk. If you have inserted the wrong disk or wish to change it, insert a new 
disk and press the G2 key again. If you want to wipe out all programs and samples 
in memory and load the contents of the disk, press . You will be asked if this is 
what you really want to do. Make sure that you either do not want the programs and 
samples in memory, or that they are saved to disk before you proceed. As the disk is 
loading, you will receive this display 


STRING C3 S 6% 
loading sample:— STRING C2 


indicating the loading progress. 


The other option, LE+$J, allows you to load a program and all associated samples (free 
memo ermitting). To do this, highlight a program using the CURSOR keys, and 
press . The program, and its associated samples, will be loaded into memory. If 
the samples required by this program already exist in memory, they will be loaded 
anyway, but they will overwrite the samples currently in memory. If there is not 
enough memory to load a program and its samples, the message 


[STRING C3 S_ 6% 


ll! Insufficient waveform memory!! 


will be displayed. In this case, you will have to delete some existing programs and/or 
samples to free up some memory space. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


SELECT PROG 25 





LOADING FROM HARD DISK 


lf you have a hard disk of any description connected via SCSI for loading sounds, you 
will receive the following display when F5 is pressed: 









LOC: FROM Cle 





> EEE vol: NOT NAMED 


STRINGS 1 

SOFT STRINGS programs: 8 
OCT STRINGS (samples: 6) 
SLOW STRINGS free mem: 100% 
PIZZA STRNGS rLOAD.4 


Emad (CT) a CY DISK MGS CP+S) (VOL) 


This is almost the same as for floppy except that you can see it tells you that it is a 
hard disk. You may select from different volumes by moving the cursor to where it 
says NOT NAMED and scrolling through the volumes on the disk. By moving the 
cursor to where it says ‘A’ after HARD-: , you may select different partitions to 
choose other volumes. Loading is done in the manner described above - press 

to load the entire volume and to load a particular program and its associated 
samples. 


NOTE: There is more to using a hard disk than that, unfortunately, such as matching 
SCSI ID's, formatting, etc.. For details on using the S2800 with a hard disk, please 
refer to the section HARD DISK CONTROL in the DISK section. 





Other disk operations, like saving and formatting disks, are performed in the DISK 
mode, not from this page. This page is intended purely for quick access to loading 
from disk. 


DELETING PROGRAMS 


Programs and their associated qt may be deleted from memory in this page, 
which is accessed by pressing the key. Pressing this key displays this screen: 






CELETE FROSFAM: FROM MEMOIR’, 
* 1 STRINGS 1 programs: 8 










2 PIANO 
5 Ea free: 12% 
4 BIG KIT 

S SYN BASS r delete , 






med CA) a WE PROG) PNUM (ALL 


When this page is displayed, the cursor will highlight a program. Highlight the 
program you want to delete using the CURSOR keys. There are three soft key 
actions that you can take, all concerned with deleting programs: ROG) NUM (ALL 


NOTE: If you delete a program from memory, make sure that you really do not need 
that program in the future, or that you have saved it to disk first. In some cases, as 


explained below, deleting a program will also delete samples. Make sure these really 
are unwanted or have been saved to disk before proceeding. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


26 SELECT PROG 





The three ‘action’ keys are as follows: 


PROG) Pressing this will display this prompt: 
S SYN BASS | r delete ; 
delete one program? GO ABORT 


and you should press GO or ABORT as necessary. 


lf the program is the only one in memory using a particular set 
of samples, you will receive the following prompt: 


5 SYN BASS | r delete , 
delete 3 released samples? NO YES 


Press the appropriate soft key if you are sure that you want to 
delete the program and its associated samples. 


lf the samples contained in the program are used elsewhere in 
other programs, you will not receive this prompt as it is 
assumed you don't want to lose these samples. 


NUM This will delete all programs which have the same number as 
the highlighted program. You will be asked if you want to 
proceed with the bulk program delete. If these programs are 
the only ones using particular samples, you will be asked if you 
want to delete the samples as well. 


(ALL) This, of course, is the most drastic of these three options. If 
you answer GO and YES to the questions regarding released 
samples, then all programs, (except for an S2800 generated 
program - TEST PROGRAM) and samples will be deleted. 
Deleting samples and rearranging memory space will take a 
little time, so be patient while this takes place. 


NOTE: Obviously, this is an option to be used with some caution. If the programs 
and samples in memory have not been saved to disk, deleting programs and/or 


samples at this point will be fatal - YOU WILL NOT BE ABLE TO RETRIEVE THEM. 
Please be careful. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


SELECT PROG 27 





USING THE S2800'S EFFECTS 


These days, effects are as important a feature of a sound as the filter settings or 
envelope settings and when you load a sound from disk you want to be able to recall it 
with its effects every time you load it. The S2800's internal effects allow you to do 
this. 


When you turn on the $2800, you have 50 preset effects to choose from made up of 
four basic effects types. These are: 


ECHO - this is a three tap delay line. In other words, instead of having just one delay 
setting as most units do, you have three and each delay can be set separately each 
with its own feedback and pan position. This allows you to create a wide range of 
delay and echo effects from straight single delays to ping-pong echo through to 
complex multi-tap echoes that can simulate the echo effects only offered by older tape 
echo devices but without the wow and flutter and tape hiss, of course!! 


CHORUS - there is one all purpose effect that covers every type of modulated delay 
effect from mild, shimmering chorus to flanging effects. The algorithm used for these 
effects is very complex and uses four delay lines that are modulated by a low 
frequency oscillator (LFO) but the modulation phase angle for each delay line is 
different. This allows you to create rich, swirling stereo effects and also eliminates the 
unpleasant cyclic repetition you get with chorus and flange units that use only one 
delay with one LFO. 


PITCH SHIFT - this is a stereo pitch shifter that allows you to transpose a sound up 
or down by as little as .01 of a semitone for subtle detune effects to 50 semitones. 
There are two pitch shifters and each one has a delay line in the feedback loop 
allowing many interesting special ‘spiral’ and arpeggio effects to be created. 


DELAY - This emulates a single delay digital delay line for long delay effects. 
Modulation is also provided for flanging effects. 


On the S2800, you have what we cail an "EFFECTS FILE" and this contains 50 
effects. These effects can be freely assigned to any program number so that one 
effect can be used on several different programs. For example, you may have a 
strings program, a brass program and a piano program with the program numbers 1, 
2 and 3 and you may wish them all to share the same chorus effect. In this case, all 
you need to do is assign the appropriate chorus effect to programs 1, 2 and 3. Of 
course, every program can have its own unique effect if you wish. 


Similarly, a group of programs that have the same program number may share one 
effect so that, in a layered, split or multi-timbral setup, you may assign an effect to all 
sounds ‘globally’ and each program can have its own effects level using the SEND 
parameter described in the mixer section above. 


This method of effects assignment makes the internal effects unit behave more like an 
external unit where effects can be freely assigned to any program and you can mix 
and match your effects to programs as you like. If you don't like any effect, simply 
select another until you find one that matches the sound exactly (or, of course, create 
your own). Furthermore, it is possible to ‘grab’ an effect off another disk and assign it 
to any program. 


NOTE: When you use the following internal effects: chorus, pitch shifter and delay, 
the polyphony is 


with chorus and pitchshifter: 27 voices 
with delay: 30 voices 





Version 1.0 10/92 


28 SELECT PROG 





To access the multi-effects, press F7 - - and you will receive something like the 
following screen display: 


Cprog:MMBl= 1> no: 1 CHORUS 
type: CHORUS output: 99 


pan: MID 


speed: HF cut: 99 


depth: width: 99 
feedback: 50 


=LET 





CA) Me GGG (SAVEN (COPY) Fx (MUTE) 


The fields across the top of the screen are as follows: 


prog: 


no: 


effect 


Version 1.0 10/92 


nane 


This field allows you to assign any effect to any program. This 
is done by selecting the appropriate program (this would 
normally be done in the main SELECT PROG screen but can 
be changed here if you wish by changing the first numeric 
field) and then assigning the effect you require. In other 
words, if the display reads: 


(prog: 3= 4) 


then program number 3 has effect number 4 assigned to it. 
You can change the effect assignment by changing the effect 
number and, as you do this, the name of the effect shown 
alongside will also change. 


This shows the currently selected effect number. You can 
change this to audition other effects without necessarily 
changing the effects assignment set in the prog: field 
described above. If you prefer the effect assigned in this field, 
you can then assign that effect in the prog: field. This field 
also allows you to temporarily assign another effect but this 
will not be retained when you select another program. 


Although not labelled as such, this field shows the name of the 
selected effect. You may create your own name by pressing 
NAME and typing in a name from the front panel and then 
pressing ENT/PLAY. Names of up to 12 characters can be 
used. As you select different effects in the prog: orno: 
field, the name shown here will change. 


ECHO 


SELECT PROG 29 





The rest of the screen depends on the effect chosen in the type: field described ina 
moment but our designers have kept many parameters consistent between different 
effects to make programming that much easier for you. 


The parameters on the right of the screen are more or less constant for every effect. 


output: This sets the output level of the effect. 
pan: this sets the pan position of the effect. 
HF cut: this is a pre-EQ that limits the amount of high frequency 


component going to the effect. This allows you to filter out 
high frequencies and so create smoother effects. (This does 
not appear in the ECHO effect) 


width this allows you to set the stereo ‘spread’ of the effect. All 
effects are stereo and give wide, spacious effects but there 
may be occasions where you don't want that width. This 
control allows you to limit this. 99 represents full stereo width 
and 00 gives you a totally monaural effect and you may set a 
value anywhere in between to obtain the right effect (this 
does not appear in the DELAY effect). 


The echo effect allows a great deal of flexibility in the creation of multi-tap delays. 





There are four delay lines that feed each other in series. Delays 1 - 3 are capable of up 
360mS of delay whilst delay 4 is capable of 180mS of delay and, in total, you have 
1260mS of delay. Each delay has its own feedback loop and pan position control and 
repeat echoes have the effect of ‘flying’ round the stereo image. These parameters 
allow you to create a wide range of echo effects that emulate the warmth and density 
of tape delay units with their complex, multi-head echoes. 











Version 1.0 10/92 


30 SELECT PROG 





To further assist in the simulation of natural echo and tape echo, there is a high 
frequency damping parameter that gradually reduces high frequency components so 
that multiple repeats get slightly duller with each repeat. There is also a delay on the 
left output. 


When you select ECHO in the type: field, you get the following display: 





Cprog:MMBl= 1> no: 1 PING PONG 







type: ECHO output: 99 
Di >D2>D3>Dleft pan: MID 
del: 360 360 360 Oo mS 
fbk: 00 OO 50 damp: 00 width: 99 
pan: RSO R50 L590 
Ee (ST) a CG (SAVE) (COPY) FX (MUTE) 





and the parameters are as follows: 


del: This sets the delay time for each of the delay lines 1 to 4. The 
range for delays 1 to 3 is 0-360mS each and for delay 4, the 
range is 0-180mS. 


fbk: This sets the amount of feedback for each delay. Please note 
that at excessive settings, the feedback has the potential to 
overload and cause instability 


pan: This sets the pan position for each of the delay lines. 


damp: This sets the high frequency damping so that each repeat gets 
progressively duller. This is a phenomenon that happens with 
natural echo and can be easily simulated here. 


The rest of the controls are the same as for the other effects. 
CHORUS’ EFFECTS 


These are modulated delay line effects otherwise known as chorus and flanging. The 
principle behind such effects is that a short delay line is modulated by a low frequency 
oscillator (LFO) and this has the effect of creating pitch and tonal variations that can 
be used to add richness and depth to a sound. As mentioned, the algorithm for these 
effects uses four delay lines each with an out of phase LFO for modulation resulting in 
a rich, non-cyclic effect. Classic flanging effects are available using the DDL effects 
explained later. The chorus effects are selected in the type: field. Selecting this 
effect gives you the following screen: 





Cprog:MMBl= 1> no: 1 CHORUS 







type: CHORUS output: 99 

pan: MID 
speed: 10 HF cut: 99 
depth: 50 width: 99 





feedback: 50 
Dee ids COPY) FX [UTE 





The parameters are as follows: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


SELECT PROG 31 





speed: 


depth: 


feedback: 


PITCH SHIFTER 


This sets the LFO rate for the effect. The LFO rate can be set 
between 01 and 99 and at 00 it is off. When switched off, the 
depth: control, in conjunction with the feedback: 
control, allows you to set the chorus or flange effect manually 
and you can use this to add interesting, non-harmonic metallic 
overtones to sounds. 


This sets the depth of modulation from the LFO and the range 
is from 00 to 99. If the LFO is set to 00 (i.e. off), this control 
allows you to ‘tune’ the metallic overtones to specific pitches. 
When depth: is set to 00, no chorus or flange effect will be 
heard. When the speed: control is set to 00, you may use 
this control to set the non-harmonic overtones to the sound. 


This sets the amount of output signal that is fed back into the 
input stages of the chorus. Increasing this creates a more 
dramatic effect. It is most useful in flanging effects although 
small amounts of it will accentuate certain chorus effects. Be 
careful when using this control as it is possible on certain 
sounds to introduce harmonic instability - in other words, it 
may accentuate a certain frequency in the sound and cause 
loud peaks. In certain circumstances, these peaks will be re- 
circulated and may create undesired ‘howl round’. 


The S2800 contains a stereo pitch shifter and it is possible to set separate pitch 
shifts for the left and right outputs. Furthermore, you may set delays within the pitch 
shifters feedback loop to create a variety of interesting arpeggio effects. 


Selecting PITCH SHIFT in the type: field calls up the following screen: 


Cprog:MMBl= 1> no: 1 MILD DETUNE 
type: PITCH SHIFT output: 99 


LEF ft RIGHT pan: MID 


tune:-00.05 400.05 HF cut: 99 


feedback: 00 00 width: 99 
delay: Oo mS 0 


Ea d (AT) a Ga SAVE) COPY) Fx (MUTE) 





As you can see, there are separate controls for the left and right pitch shift. These 


are: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


32 SELECT PROG 





tune: This sets the pitch shift and is variable between 00.01 of a 
semitone to 50 semitones up or down. 


feedback: This control sets the amount of signal that is re-circulated back 
into the pitch shift. Be careful because with certain sounds 
and certain pitch shifts you may get instability and ‘howl 
around’. 


delay: This control sets a delay time for the feedback parameter. At 
higher settings, the signal feeding back will be delayed and so, 
using this parameter, it is possible to create a wide range of 
arpeggio and other effects. With the tune parameters set to a 
wide interval and feedback set to, say, 60, you can create 
rising and falling arpeggios. With the tune controls set to a 
smaller interval, you can create interesting echo effects where 
there is a slight pitch bend on the repeats. 


These parameters are identical between the left and right pitch shifters although they 
are totally separate. The remaining controls are the same as the other effects. 


DELAY 


This is a standard DDL (digital delay line) that offers one single repeat. Selecting 
DELAY in the type: field will display this screen: 






prog: MMBl= 1> no: 1 DDL 









type: ECHO output: 99 
delay: 500 mS pan: MID 
feedback: 50 HF cut: 99 


lfo rate: 10 
lfo depth: Oo mS 


Emad (AUT) Me Ge SAVE) COPY) Fx (MUTE) 





This effect type allows you to set up long, repeating delays of up to 1 second as well 
as thick flanging effects. The parameters are: 


delay: This sets the initial delay time and is variable from 0-999 
milliseconds. 
feedback: This sets the feedback for the delay. When used as a DDL for 


echo effects, this sets the number of repeats. When used with 
LFO modulation for flanging effects, this emphasises the 
effect. Be careful with this control - as on all DDL's, setting it 
too high may cause instability! 


lfo rate: This sets the modulation speed for flanging effects. 


lfo depth: This sets the depth of the LFO when creating flanging effects. 
It is measured in milliseconds - i.e., it shows how many 
milliseconds the LFO will sweep through. 


To set delays, simply set the delay: parameter and the feedback: parameter. To 
create flanging effects, the delay time really needs to be set between 5 and 20 
milliseconds. The Ifo rate: and |fo depth: can be set to anything and the 
feedback: parameter can be used to to emphasise the effect making it thicker and 
nastier. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


SELECT PROG 33 





MUTING EFFECTS 


There is one final function that applies to all effects and that is MUTE. This is available 
in all of the SELECT PROG modes and allows you to temporarily disable the effects 
so that you may hear your sound ‘dry’. This parameter is not stored as part of the 
program and is a local function only although its status is saved to disk as a volume 
attribute. 


Normally, this soft key will display MUTE). To mute the effects, press F8 and you will 
receive the display in this ‘soft box' and the effects will be muted. Pressing it 
again will restore the MUTE] message and the effects will be switched back on. 


COPYING AND MOVING EFFECTS AROUND 


In the FX mode, it is possible to move one effect to another location using the SAVE 
and COPY soft keys (F5 and F6). Select the effect you wish to move and press 
SAVE (F5). The effect is placed in a small ‘clipboard’ and the cursor will automatically 
be placed on the No: field and you may now Select the effect number in which you 
wish to place this effect. When you change this number, the effects selection changes 
to show you which effect you will be overwriting. When you have found the required 
location, press SAVE - F6 - and the effect will be copied. 


You may also take effects from another disk using this function. Ensuring that you 
save your current effects file first, load the required effects file from a disk. When the 
effects file has loaded (it will only take a second or two), select the the effect you 
wish to use and save it. Now remove the disk and load up the original effects file and 
choose a location and copy it. In this way, effects from any disk can be loaded into 
the S2800 and used with any program you wish. 


USING SELECT PROG - PROGRAMS WITH THE SAME NUMBER 


Most of the time, you will probably want to load in the sounds you need and these will 
be single programs for playing from the keyboard (or whichever MIDI instrument you 
play). AS we have seen, this is easy enough - simply scroll through using the DATA 
control or select them via MIDI program change. There are occasions when you want 
to play several programs together, however, and this is where the renumbering 
becomes useful. 


LAYERING PROGRAMS 


The S2800's 32-voice polyphony makes layering a more viable proposition than on 24- 
Or 16-voice samplers. Although it is possible to layer sounds within one program 
(something which may be more convenient on occasions and one we will look at when 
we venture into EDIT PROGRAM), it is useful to be able to call up several programs 
together. 


For example, let's say you have a string program and brass program you want to 
combine. As mentioned, you could go to great lengths to make up a program that 
combined all of these samples but an easier way is to simply give them the same 
program number - for example, renumber them both to, say, program 1. When you 
select program 1 you will then select the combined programs with the strings and 
brass layered together. You may also set the balance and pan positions between these 
sounds in the MIX page. 


You may prefer to layer sounds using RNUM rather than creating one program with 
the required sample(s) in it because there are certain aspects to creating a program 
that affect all things the same. For example, the auto-panning and effects send would 
affect all samples equally - when using the RNUM function, one sound in the layer 


Version 1.0 10/92 


34 SELECT PROG 





could be panning slowly left to right with lots of echo whilst another stays central 
with no effects. You also have easier control of the respective levels of the programs 
in the layers. 


Of course, you are not limited to layering just two sounds - you could layer up to 32 
programs for a monster monophonic lead line or bass sound! 


CREATING KEYBOARD SPLITS - METHOD 1 


As for layering, it is easy to set key splits in EDIT PROGRAM but, again, it may be 
more convenient to create the split using the RNUM function. 


Let us Say you have two programs - UPRIGHT BASS and VIBES - and you want to 
create a split so that you can perform a walking bass line with your left hand and a 
jazzy vibes solo with the right. By setting the RANGE parameter in the MIDI page 
(F4) accordingly, the bass can be set to finish at B2 and the vibes set to start at C3. 
Even though both these programs originally spanned the entire keyboard, this 
function allows you to impose limits on the programs’ keyranges. Now, assuming that 
both programs have the same program number (i.e. both are renumbered 1 or 
something), then you can play both programs with the keyboard split. 


CREATING KEYBOARD SPLITS - METHOD 2 


This second method requires you to select two programs whose keyranges were 
limited in EDIT PROGRAM when the programs were created. Let us say you have a 
bass guitar program that only spans as far as C3 and a solo flute whose keyrange 
starts at C3 - simply renumbering those programs so that they share the same 
number will create the keyboard split (although in this example, playing C3 will play 
both programs). 


USING RENUMBERING TO CREATE MULTI-TIMBRAL SETUPS 


One of the most appealing things about MIDI is its multi-channel ability. Originally, 
synth modules could be set to a specific MIDI channel number so that several modules 
could be set to play several musical parts from a sequencer. Of course, as technology 
advanced, it became possible to do this within one module and such a module is 
known as ‘multi-timbral’ - i.e. 'many sounds’. The S2800 is no exception and has 
powerful multi-timbral capabilities. 


To set up a multi-timbral assignment, we use the renumbering function again. Assuming 
you have loaded in a pile of programs you wish to sequence, give them all the same 
program number. This is done in the RNUM page and you simply give the same 
number to all programs using the LALLJ function. You should receive a display 
something like this when you return to the main SELECT PROG screen: 


mn Oe CAM g em CVOl: VOLUME 020 
1 STRINGS 1 8 program(s) 
8 now active 

PROGRAM NUMBER: BT 


1 SYN BASS 
LCT (a) Ie Di! ee eS ee (MUTE) 


> 
ode 
ok 
> 
a 
> 





Here, all programs are number 1. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


SELECT PROG 35 





Of course, you will need to assign each program to have different MIDI channels: 















[hid prog no: cha range pol pri tr 
* 1 STRINGS 1 1 C_O G_8 32 NORM +00 
*x 1 PIANO 2 C_O G_8 32 NORM +00 
* 1 BASS 5 C_0 G_8 32 NORM +00 
* 1 BIG KIT 19 C_O G_8 32 NORM +900 
* 1 SYN BASS 7 C_O G_8 32 NORM +00 


Bed 0) Ee MID] ME Se ee (AUT) 


and you can use the MIX page to set the levels, pan position, output assignment and 
effects send for each program: 






















Cie prog no: st pan send lev 
* 1 STRINGS 1 80 99 MID 1 45 
* 1 PIANO 76 99 MID 2 80 
* 1 BASS 99 99 MID 1 93 
* 1 BIG KIT 94 99 MID 1 89 
* 1 SYN BASS 87 95 MID 2 






80 
IG Mix Dil ee eae ee UTE) 





Remember, also, that you may use a combination of all of these techniques and you 
can, of course, have a mix of split and layered programs within a multi-timbral 
assignment. 


Using the S2800 live, you may have several multi-timbral setups in memory at any time 
(memory allowing, of course!). In this way, you may have sets of programs for each 
song recalled from a MIDI program change from your sequencer. 


Once you are happy with anything you set up, remember to save it to disk if you want 
to keep these changes. 


If you are new to the S2800, don't worry about all this for the moment - as you gain 
more experience with the instrument, come back to these techniques when you're 
ready. They will also make more sense in a moment when we have a look at some of 
the other functions. 


CONCLUSION 


So far, we have seen the enormous possibilities offered simply by loading some 
sounds off disk, renumbering them, mixing them and playing around with the effects. 
There are even more exciting possibilities open to the adventurous musician when we 
enter the realms of sampling and creating programs and this is the real joy of owning 
a sampler. The next section covers all this so, if you're ready..... 


Version 1.0 10/92 


36 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 


Edit sample is where you make and edit your recordings. In this mode, you may, 
amongst other things, trim, loop, join, merge, reverse, re-sample and timestretch 
recordings. But before we can do any of that, we first need to make some recordings. 


WHAT IS SAMPLING? 


Sampling is a process where we record sound digitally. All natural sound comes in the 
form of variations in sound pressure. Using a microphone, we can convert those 
changes in air pressure into rising and falling voltages. Once they exist in that format, 
we can process them through ANALOGUE TO DIGITAL CONVERTERS (ADC) to 
turn those voltages into streams of digital data. Once they exist as digital data, we 
can edit them with alarming precision. 


VV os i 


VOLTAGE » DIGITISED 


In the ADC, the sound is ‘sampled’ at a rate of 44,100 times per second. You can liken 
this to film. If we take a lot of photographs in very quick succession, when we play it 
back, we have the illusion of movement. The same is true of sampling. If we take 
enough samples, we get an accurate reproduction of the sound. To carry this analogy 
even further, if you think of the very early days of film where they didn't take so many 
frames in a second, the results were jerky and distorted. The same could be said about 
old samplers - because they sampled less (that is, the sampling rate was lower), the 
sound quality was not so good. In order to reproduce sound accurately, you need to 
sample at a frequency that is at least twice the upper reaches of the sounds frequency 
range. In other words, if a sound contains frequencies that extend to, say, 15kHz, 
you need to sample at 30kHz at least. Instruments such as cymbals which are very 
bright and contain many overtones need to be sampled at 40kHz. A bass drum, 
however, which has very few upper harmonics, could feasibly be sampled at 20kHz. 


The S2800 samples at 44.1kHz, the same as compact disc so you can be sure you are 
getting CD quality sound from your sampler. 


The digitized waveform is loaded into RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY (RAM) where it 
exists as numbers. As you know, computers and microprocessors are very good at 
dealing with numbers and so we are able to rearrange those numbers and so alter the 
sound. 


At the end of the process, we need to be able to convert those numbers back into an 


electrical analogue waveform and so the numbers are reconstituted into analogue via 
DIGITAL TO ANALOGUE CONVERTERS and output to your mixer or amplifier. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 37 





One of the inherent problems with sampling is the RAM and it is not possible to have 
an endless supply of it installed in the sampler. As a result, our recordings (or samples 
as they are more commonly known in the music industry) have to be kept fairly short. 
In order to make them last longer so that long notes can be sustained, we need to 
loop them. This involves selecting a portion of the sound that will repeat over and 
over again when we hold our finger(s) on the keyboard. 





LOOP ZONE 


The biggest problem, though, is the nature of the sounds you sample. Most musical 
instruments have particular resonant frequencies (or ‘formants’ as they are sometimes 
called) plus other characteristics such as vibrato, etc.. In the instrument themselves, 
these characteristics stay constant regardless of the notes being played but, on a 
sampler, because you are transposing the sound up and down (slowing it down and 
speeding it up much like a tape recorder), these are also transposed which leads to a 
phenomena quaintly referred to as "“munchkinisation”. We have all laughed at hearing 
Our voice speeded up up on a tape recorder sounding like some bizarre cartoon 
Character - the same will happen on a sampler and this is because the voice has 
formants and other attributes which do not transpose well. Similarly, the sound's 
envelope will change - transposed down an octave, a percussive attack will sound 
quite sluggish. 


To overcome this, we need to use a technique known as MULTI-SAMPLING - that is, 
taking various samples of the instrument at a variety of pitches across its range so 
that, at any one time, the sound is never transposed too much and so avoids serious 
"munchkinisation” and envelope distortion. Typically, you can get away with one 
sample per octave but some difficult instruments with strong formants need more. 
The saxophone and piano are two instruments that spring to mind and which are 
notoriously difficult to capture. 


Another property of an acoustic instrument is that it can make so many sounds 
depending on how it's played. When played softly, the sound is not only quieter but 
softer in tone and, when played hard, is louder and brighter. Some instruments have 
quite extreme ranges in tone. Coupled with playing techniques (i.e. thumbed and 
slapped bass, bowed and plucked violin), to accurately replicate this on a sampler, we 
can take different samples according to playing styles. On the S2800 we have four 
velocity zones that allow us to use playing technique to switch between these 
different samples so that you could, for example, use velocity to switch between a 
slow legato viola and an aggressively bowed viola. 


Of course, a lot of the time you can take just a few samples, loop them for sustain, 
map them out across the keyboard and have perfectly acceptable results which are 
usable in a wide range of applications. For some sounds such as drums and 
percussion, you don't need to loop. 


Let's now have a look at the EDIT SAMPLE functions 


Version 1.0 10/92 


38 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





THE MAIN SAMPLE SELECT PAGE 


The page you receive on first entering this mode looks something like this: 








=HMELE ECIT 
name: PULSE 


sample: 


size: 


“256 
Free: 2370832-100% 
samples in mem: 6 


xexisting Sampx 
mode: MONO monitoring program:- 
MONITOR 


SLCT Gl Gad FS a eed 






























Here we see one of the default sample waveforms, a pulse wave called, not 
surprisingly PULSE. Also on this screen is information regarding the current state of 
your memory and you can see the size of the selected sample, how much memory is 
free and how many samples are currently in memory. 


In EDIT SAMPLE, there is an alternative, temporary style of display that allows you to 
see sample length, etc., in milliseconds and you may toggle between the two types of 
display by pressing and holding down any of the page keys again. You may also press 
the page key again to toggle between displaying MIDI notes as numbers or as names. 
In this page, pressing SLCT will switch between sample point and millisecond displays 
and will display this screen: 


=HMFLE ECIT sample: 


> PULSE sizet ibis 
Me ee ee ag Sampe| Free! 39760MS-100% 


samples in mem: 6 

mode: MONO monitoring program:-— 
MONITOR 
SLCT Gall Gaia (a eee (eed 
















NOTE: The millisecond display is purely for reference - you cannot actually edit in 
milliseconds. This is not a fault of the S2800. The reason is that all editing has to be 
done referenced to sample points as this is the only true reference the S2800 has 
when dealing with samples. Because a sample can be played anywhere on the 
keyboard, to edit in milliseconds makes no sense - what does 5milliseconds mean to a 
sample recorded at C3 but being played at C2? You will find this display option useful 
though when setting certain parameters as we shall see. 





Only two fields are available in the SLCT page: monitoring program: allows you 
to monitor a sample you are making or have made or are editing referenced to the 
program it is placed in. For example, let us say you have made a snare drum sample 
and this is placed into a program DRUMS 1. By selecting DRUMS 1 in this field, you 
will be able to edit it in EDIT SAMPLE whilst listening to the other drums in the 
program. For example, to trim the start of the snare so that it ‘feels’ just right, you 
may want to monitor the other drums as well, maybe even sequence them as you are 
editing. This field also allows you to play samples in EDIT SAMPLE on a MIDI channel 
other than 1, the default. The other field, mode:, allows you to select whether your 
editing and sampling will be in MONO or STEREO. This may be set here and in other 
pages if you wish. 


The soft keys along the bottom are: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 39 





SLT This indicates you are on the sample select page. Press this to 
switch between sample points and millisecond displays. 

This takes you to the record setup page where you may set 
such parameters as sample rate, sampling time, etc.. 

(is4 This takes you directly to the recording page. 

This takes to one level of editing giving you TRIM, LOOP and 
JOIN samples. 

This takes to another level of editing where you may 


timestretch and re-sample your recordings. 


This takes you to a third level of editing where you may 
perform ‘sectional’ editing (that is remove sections from 
samples) scale and normalise levels and set digital fades on 
samples. 


i 


This allows you to delete samples from memory. 
These will be discussed in a moment. 
NAMING SAMPLES - COPYING AND RENAMING 


Before you can do any sampling, you must name the sample you are about to record. If 
you have just switched the S2800 on with no disk in it, you will have the four synth 
waveforms in there. Use one of these as the basis of your new sample. 


To copy or rename a sample, press the NAME key - this turns the front panel keys 
into letter entry keys and you may type in a name of up to 12 characters (upper case 
only). The +/< and -/> keys input backspace and spaces accordingly and the MARK 
and JUMP keys input '#' and '.’ respectively. 


You will see this prompt: 


[LETTERS . « “NAME for numbers ENT to exit>| 


Pressing the NAME key again switches the numeric keypad from letters to numbers 
and you will receive this prompt: 


| LETTERS . « “NAME for letters ENT to exit>| 


You may press NAME again to access the numeric keypad's letters. When in the 
‘numbers’ mode, the +/< and -/> keys input '+' and "-' to a name. Pressing NAME again 
reverts you to entering letters from the numeric keypad. 


Alternatively, in conjunction with the CURSOR keys which can be used to move the 
cursor around within the name, you can use the DATA control to scroll through 
characters. 


When you have entered your name, press ENT and you will get this prompt: 


| Select: ([COPYI(REN] Exidl | 


Pressing [COPY will copy the original sample - use this to create a basis for a new 
sample. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


40 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





lf the sample name is an existing one, the boxed area to the top left of the screen will 
show something like: 


name: STRING C3 
*xexlsting Sampx 


and you will receive the following prompt: 


'! MUST USE A DIFFERENT NAME !! 


You must enter a unique new name. 


Pressing LRENJ will simply rename the currently selected sample with the name just 
entered. If the name exists, you will be prompted as above and you must re-enter a 
unique name. 


Pressing [éxit] will exit the naming process altogether with no action taking place. 
Should you press this by mistake, you will see that the boxed area to left of the screen 
still retains the new name you entered so press NAME immediately followed by ENT 
and make your choice again. 


It is worth taking the time to name your samples sensibly. It may be quick to simply call 
them SAMPLE 1, SAMPLE 2, 3, 4, etc., but, when you come to put them into a 
program, these names may not mean much to you. If you return to them in a week 
they certainly won't. Names like PIANO C#3 is best - this tells you the instrument and 
the note it is sampled on so it will be easier to set your program up later when you 
come to assign your samples to specific keyranges. 


DELETING SAMPLES 


It is possible to delete samples using the LDEL] key - F8. Pressing this will give you the 
following prompt: 


[delete one sample ? GO ABORT | 


and you should press F7 or F8 accordingly. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 41 





SETTING UP FOR A RECORDING 


There are two pages, REC1 and REC2, which deal with making recordings. REC1 is 
a ‘record setup’ page where certain parameters may be set if necessary. REC2 is 
where you actually make your recordings although certain importyant parameters from 
REC1 are also available there so may may prefer to go straight to REC2 to make a 
recording. 


Pressing E2084 will display this screen: 


RECORD SET-UP sample name: STRING C4 
mode: [Iii xexisting Sampx 
CUdiew: LEFT bandwidth: 20kHZ 


start: INPUT LEVEL jorig. pitch: C_4 
monitor: ON record tim: 1.00s 
CForeet 2257360=100% ! = 44100= 1% 
Sad REC! Ga ES ee ed CTisT 





This shows that you have named (or selected for over-writing) a sample called 
STRING C4. You may select another sample for recording over if you wish (assuming 
they exist, of course!) by moving the cursor to the sample name field and scrolling 
through the available samples. 


The fields on this page are: 


mode: Here you may select between stereo or mono recording and 
editing. If you select STEREO, the sample will automatically 
have -L and -R appended to both the left and right samples 
respectively after the recording has been made. After that, 
any editing you do will be done in stereo unless you specifically 
switch to mono. 





(U)ieu: Here you may select which side of the stereo image you wish 
to look at when editing stereo samples. You will note that if 
MONO is selected above, you cannot select anything other than 
LEFT. The 'V' is in parentheses because this field is shown in 
other pages of the EDIT SAMPLE mode as an abbreviation. 


start: This field allows you to select how recording will be initiated. 
The choices are: 


INPUT LEVEL -.this selects that recording will begin once a 
threshold level has been exceeded. This is the default setting 
and one that is used by most people. The threshold is set in 
the REC2 page. 


NID! NOTE - this selects that recording will begin when any 
MIDI note is received. This is very useful when sampling a 
sound from a synth because the note on that makes the sound 
can also be used to start the recording. 


FOOTSWITCH - this selects that the action of a footswitch 
closing will start recording. This may be useful for ‘hands free’ 
sampling. For example, let us imagine you are sampling a heavy 
metal guitar though rather noisy amp and you are doing the 
playing yourself. Threshold based recording is no use because 


Version 1.0 10/92 


42 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





monitor: 


the background hum would set the sampler off. In this case, 
the footswitch may help. 


Here you can select how you will monitor the signal you are 
sampling. There are two options: ON will select that as soon 
as you enter the REC2 page,the signal you are sampling will be 
heard ‘through’ the S2800. At the end of recording, it will 
automatically switch this ‘through’ signal out so you can hear 
your new sample. The other option, OFF, switches the 
through signal off completely (although this may be 
overridden in the REC2 page if you wish). This is used when 
monitoring the signal you are sampling through a mixer. 





bandwidth: 


orig. 


record 


pitch: 


tim: 


This is not accessible but merely shows the amount of free 
memory. This can be displayed in sample points or milliseconds 
simply by pressing the REC1 key. The percentage of free 
memory is also displayed. The 'F' is in parentheses because this 
field is shown in other pages of the EDIT SAMPLE mode as 
an abbreviation. 


This sets the bandwidth for the recording and you have two 
choices - 20kH2 and 10kH2. Don't be put off by the 10kHZ 
option because you can make very respectable recordings at 
this sample rate. It is not possible to sample at any other rates 
but, if you wish, you may sample at 44.1KHZ (i.e. 2OKHZ) and 
then re-sample it later to, say, 15kKHZ to save on memory 
space. 


This sets the base pitch for the sound you are about to 
sample. At this point, you don't have to worry too much about 
this because you can set this parameter in the REC2 page and 
you can retune your sample in ED.2 later if necessary. 


Here you may set the length of the sample you are about to 
make. The range is limited only by available memory space and 
whether the sample is stereo or mono. Again, you needn't 
worry about setting this field now as you can set it later in 
REC2 if you prefer. As you set this field, the fields below 
show you how much memory the new sample will take. 


lf you are not sure how long to set this, it is best to set it 
longer than you think you need. Samples can always be 
trimmed and edited later. 


Once you have set the parameters as you like on this page, you don't have to worry 
about them for the rest of the sampling session as these are retained from sample to 
sample as you record them. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 43 









IMPORTANT NOTE - SAVING RECORD PARAMETERS TO DISK 


It is possible to save your own set of record parameters to disk. By setting the 
parameters as you need them, save the operating system to floppy disk (go to disk, 
move the cursor to ‘type of load:' and select OPERATING SYSTEM. Press SAVE and 
then WIPE and/or GO. This will save your personal record parameters to disk. From 
now on, when you boot up with this floppy in the drive, these record parameters will 
always be set for you. If you have a particular way of working, this may be invaluable 
and a great time saver. If you have several different ways of working, you might like 
to save different record set-up parameters to different disks and use the appropriate 
operating system as and when you need it. You will note that you cannot save several 
operating systems on one disk - you will need a separate disk for each system you 
save. Please refer to the DISK section for more information on saving files. 












Having set your record parameters, the next screen to visit is REC2 so please press 
the key . You will receive this screen display: 


Gaenagd Gm) U:LEFT STRING C4 73%F 
-20dB ptch:C_4 tim: 1.00s= 44100= 1% 


ied (as) REC2 HEL | [Fon J LARM] 





This shows you the main record page. Across the top of this screen are shown the 
type of recording about to be made (i.e. mono or stereo) and which channel of the 
stereo image you wish to see when making a stereo recording (i.e. LEFT or RIGHT). 
The name of the sample you are about to make is also shown. These can all be changed 
at this point if you wish. You may select STEREO for recording and you may select 
RIGHT for viewing (but only if stereo is selected). You may also scroll through the 
available samples should you wish to record over one. If no other samples are present, 
you may rename the one shown here by pressing NAME followed by ENTER. 


NOTE ABOUT NAMING SAMPLES IN REC2: This is a temporary name with 
no specific copy function. If you go ahead and make the recording then a sample o 
that name is made but, should you select another sample, the new sample name will be 
lost. Please be careful so as to prevent accidental erasure of a sample. 












The remaining parameter on the top line is a percentage display showing how much 
memory is free. 


The next row of parameters allow you to set the threshold level, the base note of the 
new sample and the record time. Setting the threshold level is described below. You 
may set the base note of the sample directly from a MIDI keyboard (or other 
controller) if you wish. Providing you are monitoring through the S2800, pressing a 
note on the keyboard will set it here. You can, of course, set it manually using the 
DATA control. You may also adjust the length of time you wish to record for where it 
SayS tim: 


You will note that many of the essential REC1 parameters are also on this page, albeit 


in an abbreviated way. This is done so that you can make recordings quickly with the 
minimum of fuss. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


44 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





ADJUSTING THE RECORDING AND THRESHOLD LEVELS 


Record levels are set by adjusting the front panel 'REC LEVEL’ control. This works in 
conjunction with the three position GAIN switch on the rear panel. The level control 
should be adjusted so that the input meter to the left of the REC2 screen is as near 
to the top. 


lf you have selected INPUT LEVEL as the start mode in REC1, you will need to set 
the threshold level here. The default has been sensibly chosen for most purposes but 
you may find that some sounds with a slow attack are clipped slightly. To set the 
threshold, move the cursor to where it says -20dB. As you input your audio signal, 
set the threshold level accordingly so that it is low enough to catch the signal but not 
so low as to start recording on a false start. You will see a screen display such as: 










Gass ERY] VeLEFT STRING C4 1O0%F 
-20dB ptch:C_4 tim: 1.00s= 44100= 1% 


Ls eeceereercoreere 


ad GS) REC2 Ges 8 Fes [ed Mon | LARM) 





You will see the small level meter to the left of the screen bobbing up and down in 
accordance with the incoming audio signal and the threshold should be adjusted 
according so that the signal is just going slightly into the threshold box. It maybe that 
some adjustment of the front panel REC LEVEL control is also necessary. Once you 
have set the threshold level to your satisfaction, you are ready to make a recording. 


RECORDING ON THE $2800 


Assuming all your parameters are correctly set, all you need do is press LARM]. You will 
receive the following prompt: 


ODO 
WAITING FOR START .....-s GO EXIT 


This indicates that either the threshold level has not been exceeded yet or, if MIDI 
NOTE is selected as the start type, that a MIDI note has not been received or, if 
FOOTSWITCH was selected as the start type, that the footswitch has not been 
pressed. You may also start manually by pressing GO. If you change your mind when 
this prompt is displayed (i.e. because you suddenly realise that continuing with the 
recording is going to overwrite a valuable existing sample), you may press EXIT. 
Assuming you press GO (or any of the start types get the thing going), you will 
receive this display: 











aes ERY V:sLEFT STRING C4 100%F 
-20d0B ptch:C_4 tim: 1.00s= 44100= 1% 


ae 


RECORDING analog... ABORT 


The display will fill up with the sound as it is recorded. You may, at any time, abort the 
recording by pressing F8. This will finish the recording process early and abort that 
sample. This is useful if some mistake is made during the record process or you were 
recording over another sample you wanted to keep. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 45 





After the recording has finished, the monitoring of the incoming signal through the 
$2800 is now automatically switched off allowing you to play the new sample directly 
from the keyboard or the front panel ENT/PLAY key. To switch the monitoring back 
on again, press Mon] - METER ON. When you press Man_], the legend of that key 
changes to Moff) (i.e. this key switches monitoring OFF). If you wish to take the 
eae again, there is no need to switch the meter back on again because pressing 

will do this automatically. If, however, you wish to either listen to the source 
again (in the event of a mistake, perhaps) or set up for the next sample, specifically 
press to switch the monitoring back on. 


lf you wish to make your next sample at this point, simply switch the monitoring back 
on again (press Hon) name the next sample and set a new base note if you need to 
(the easiest way is from the keyboard but the meter does have to be switched on for 
this - press . Press to start sampling. 


RECORDING DIGITALLY 


lf you have the IB-302D fitted, you may record digitally into the S2800. This offers 
excellent sound quality with no deterioration of signal or increase in noise. If you own 
many sampling CD's (as distinct from CD ROM which is a different thing altogether), 
then the IB-302D may well be an essential purchase. 


USING THE IB-302D DIGITAL INTERFACE 


If you have the IB-302D digital audio interface fitted, you may record digital audio into 
the S2800. 


The set-up parameters for the interface are found on F8 - (94. Pressing this key will 
display this screen: 


CISITHL INTERFFHLE — Fecei's 
RECORD 
source: 
input: ELECTRICAL 


receive rate: AUTO 


2LET LEC. § EC. | 





The fields are: 


source: This selects whether the digital audio will be received through 
the back panel jack or XLR analogue connectors (and hence 
via the S2800's analogue to digital converters) or via the 
digital inputs. The choices, you'll be surprised to know, are 
ANALOG or DIGI-TAL. 

input: This selects which of the digital inputs the audio will be 
received through if DIGITAL is selected in the field above. 
The choices are ELECTRICAL or OPTICAL which select 
whether the input will be received via the jack sockets or the 
optical fibre link. 

receive rate: This is not adjustable by the user. “The S2800 with the 
IB-302D” is workable only with 44.1KHz sampling rate, but 
not with 48 KHz. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


46 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 


NOTE: The parameters for the digital interface are also stored as part of the 


operating system (see above) so, if you always record digitally, then you might like to 
save the appropriate parameters to disk to save you having to set them up every time 
ou wish to record. 





Assuming the interface has been set correctly (see above - USING THE IB-302D 
DIGITAL INTERFACE), you will receive this screen when you enter REC2: 


Gaenad Gye VsLEFT STRING C4 100%F 
-20dB ptch:C_4 tim: 1.00s= 44100= 1% 





receiving 44.1kHZ 
[ed (SS) REC2 (GS (ee (ed Mon _ | (ERM) 


This is virtually identical to recording analogue except that you can see the message 
indicating that the S2800 is receiving digital audio correctly where it says 
receiving 4%. 1kH2. If there is some problem with the digital audio signal, you will 
receive the following: 


aed ER UV:LEFT STRING C4 100%F 
-20dB ptch:C_4 tim: 1.00s= 44100= 1% 


WAITING FOR CARRIER 
SLET REC2 (3058 [2084 (04 [Mon | LARM) 





This indicates that the digital audio signal is not getting to the S2800. Please check 
your connections carefully - it could be that the cable has become disconnected. 
Alternatively, if your cables are properly connected, then please check the set-up 
parameters for the IB-302D as there could be something wrong there. 


Assuming everything is connected properly and set up correctly, when you press 
LERMJ you will receive the usual WAITING FOR START... prompt and, if you press 
GO or when the threshold is exceeded, the MIDI note received or the footswitch 
pressed, you will get a display something like the following: 


ae ER V:LEFT STRING C4 100%F 
oe ptch:C_4 tim: 1.00s= 44100= 1% 


tr 


RECORDING digital at 44.1kHZ ABORT 





indicating the the S2800 is recording digitally. As with analogue recording, the display 
fills with the incoming sound's waveform. 


Having successfully made your recording(s), analogue or digital, we can now move on 
to sample editing. 


But first... 
** SAVE YOUR SAMPLES TO DISK NOW ** 


It is good practice to repeatedly save your work as you go - all good programmers do 
this and it is a good habit to get into. You may make a mistake and accidentally record 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 47 





over a precious new sample, you may trip over the power cord and disconnect the 
mains, you may have a power cut - these things do happen!! Although saving is 
explained in detail in the section that describes the disk operations, to save you 
hunting for it, here is a quick explanation. 


1. Insert a blank, formatted floppy disk or make sure your hard disk is connected and 
powered up. 


2. Go to the DISK mode 

3. If using a hard disk, select a suitable empty volume 
4. Press 

5. Press LGO_) 


The samples will be saved to disk and you can Carry on working safe in the knowledge 
that, should something go wrong, you can retrieve it. 


EDIT 1 - TRIM, LOOP AND JOIN 


There are three main editing modes on the S2800. ED.1 gives you acces to the basic 
editing functions such as TRIM, LOOP and JOIN. ED.2 gives access to the 
timestretch and re-sampling functions and ED.3 gives you access to the sectional 
editing, gain rescaling and sample fade function. 


The first level of sample editing we have offers TRIM, LOOPING and JOIN. TRIM is 
where we can edit the start and end of samples, trimming out any unnecessary data. 
LOOP allows us to set up to four loops so that we can sustain short sounds. JOIN is 
where we Can splice samples end to end, crossfade samples or merge samples. Our 
first port of call is TRIM. 


TRIMMING SAMPLES 


Pressing E489 in either the main SLCT or REC2 page will take you straight to the 
TRIM page and you will receive a display something like the following: 


TRIM edit—mode: MONO STRINGS C4 CSAP 
start: 1700 end: 44111 





Sad TRIM BOOM LZTN) OUT) K=—=> LCUT) 


This shows the waveform of the selected sample (in the case of coming straight from 
REC2, this will be the sample you just recorded). You may edit the start: and 
end: fields accordingly. 


The fields along the top allow you to select whether you want to edit is STEREO or 
MONO (it's pointless selecting STEREO if the sample is mono, by the way!) and you 
may, if you wish, select another sample for editing. The figure to the right of the top 
line shows how much memory is free. 

Moving the cursor to the start: field allows you to move the start point. You will 
remember from the INTRODUCTION that you can change large numbers such as this 
in several ways. You may type in a number directly from the numeric keyboard or you 
may use the DATA control. Each number field is separately accessible allowing you a 
great deal of flexibility in editing such iarge numbers. For example, to make a big 


Version 1.0 10/92 


48 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





change to the start point, move the cursor to the position just before the 1 - as you 
move the cursor you will increment in big jumps. This is good for getting someway into 
the sound with little effort. When you are close to where you want to be, move the 
cursor one position right to move in smaller increments. As you get closer and closer 
to the point you want to set, you can use finer incrementation until, with the cursor 
on the furthest right field, you are editing to a resolution of individual sample accuracy. 
All the time you are editing and changing values here (or in any sample editing fields), 
you can hear the results in real time by playing the keyboard. 


Moving the start point will give a display such as: 


TRIM edit—mode: MONO STRINGS C4 CS4F 
start: 2500 end: 44111 





ad TRIM Bot) LZIN) 4—-—) LCUT) 


You will see a vertical line indicating the position of the start point. 


Moving the cursor to the end: field and adjusting that will give you a display such as: 


TRIM edit—mode: MONO STRINGS C4 TSO%F 
start: 17090 end: 40000 


TRIM Boi CZIN) 2OUT) K==> LCUT) 





Playing the keyboard will, of course, play the edited sound. At this point, you may 
choose to destructively discard the portions either side of the start and end points by 
pressing 


NOTE: This is a destructive process and, unless you have saved this sample to disk, 


pressing LCUT) here will irrevocably erase the data either side of the start and end 
Doints. 





Whilst it is possible to edit by ear with very good precision, it is sometimes desirable 
to see what you are doing. It is possible to zoom in on the waveform using the 

key. Repeatedly pressing this will enlarge the waveform display until you are looking at 
individual samples that are an inch wide! The display centres around the start point. Of 
course, now you can't see the end point so press the K£<=3 key to switch between 
the start and end points for editing. 


lf the sound has had loops set previously, if you move the start or end point into one 
of those loops, the display will prompt you 


'!warning !!..START in active loop zone 


'lwarning !!.. END in active loop zone 


or 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 49 





If you attempt to use LCUT) at this point, it will be ignored so as not to upset good 
loops. When you get these messages, simply move the point in a different direction 
until they stop appearing - you are now out of the loop zone. You may now use 


NOTE: To cut or not to cut, that is the question!! 








Whether you trim your samples and loop them afterwards or loop your samples and 
trim them afterwards is a matter for you to decide. Our programmers have found in 
their experience, that it is best to record the sample, loop it and then trim it 
afterwards. Of course, if there is 'dead space’ either side of the sample, these should 
be removed before looping but it is felt that looping first and trimming later is safest. 





Let us now have a look at the LOOP page. 
LOOPING 


Looping is one of the trickiest areas of sampling but not impossible and the S2800 
makes it as easy as it can with some functions to help you make good loops. 


From the TRIM page, press the key to access the looping page. Again, you will 
see a display of the sample’s waveform in the left part of the display together with a 
magnified displa Pe the point where the loop rejoins the original sample sound. You 
can use the keys to zoom in or out of this window, but the display of 
the whole sample oo at a constant magnification. 





[xs time: OFF mS STRING C4 54% 
at: 129408 Ing: 1358.000 Xf: 


una 


SLT ] LOOP BOG LZTN) OUT) EXND) X=FD) 






The parameters are: 


(exh: Here you can select which loop you wish to set. The $2800 
can have four loops for every sample. This may seem excessive 
but it can help to overcome the repetitiveness of some loops. 
You may select from 1 to 4 here. 





NOTES ON USING MULTIPLE LOOPS: Whilst a sample may have multiple 
loops in it, there is one restriction you should be aware of and that is that they must 
be consecutive. That is, LOOP 1 must be followed by LOOP 2 , LOOP 3 and LOOP 4. 
You cannot have a situation where LOOP 2 is before LOOP 1 or LOOP 4 before 
LOOP 3 or LOOP 2. If you do set up such loops, certain ones will be ignored. Fo 
example, setting LOOP 3 before LOOPs 1 and 2 will cause LOOP 3 to be ignored. 
Please bear this in mind if you are creating multiple loops. 














Version 1.0 10/92 


50 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





time: This sets the length of the loop you wish to make. This is 
expressed in milliseconds. You can set a loop to last from 1mS 
to 9998mS. This is most useful when you have multiple loops. 
For example, LOOP 1 may be set to last for 5 seconds 
(5000mS), LOOP 2 for 1 second (1000mS) and LOOP 3 for 
3 seconds (3000mS). 


If you set 9999mS, this field changes to HOLD and when this 
is set, the loop will last as long as you hold a note. 


You may combine timed and held loops as you like. LOOP 1 
may be set to last 1000mS, LOOP 2 set to last 200mS and 
LOOP 3 set to HOLD. When you play a note, regardless of 
where you are on the keyboard, the sound will play through 
LOOPS 1 and 2 over the time set and then move onto LOOP 
3 which will sustain for as long as hold the note(s). This is a 
good way to breathe more life into a sample - single loops can 
sometimes sound repetitive if they are too obvious. 


A loop will repeat for the greatest whole number of times 
possible within the loop time set here. For instance, if the 
total loop time is set to 250mS and the length of the loop is 
actually 175mS, the loop will only repeat once, not 1.428 
times. This can save you a lot of calculation when you've set 
the loop length and you want a particular ‘stutter’ effect or 
repeated drum beat. 


For the most part, you will probably find that one loop is 
sufficient for most sounds so don't worry about setting 
multiple loops for every sound - you don't have to use them. 








NOTE: The easiest way to set HOLD is to type in 9999 - this will select HOLD. 


The name of the currently selected sample is shown next which can be changed if you 
wish. The memory percentage indicator is also shown. Below this line are the fields for 
setting the loop points. 


(x: «time: HOLDmS STRING C4 
at: 129408 lng: 1358.000 Xf: 


iat LOOP BAN CZTN) OUT (IND) R=FD) 


LENGTH AT 


at: Here you can select the point at which looping will begin. |.e. 
when playback reaches this point, it will go back to the point 
determined by the Ing: field described below and will loop 
either for as long as the time: field is set or for as long as you 
hold the note(s) if HOLD is selected in the time: field. 





Ing: The actual length of the looped portion (as opposed to the 
length of time that the loop will repeat) is set in this field. 


As you adjust these parameters, you will see two vertical lines move in the left part of 


the display, showing the position of the start and end points of the loop. You will 
note that this value is locked to the at: point - if you adjust the at: point, this 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 51 





parameter will also change. This is invaluable in cases where you have found a good 
loop length and want to reposition it elsewhere. 


The length field is adjustable is very fine steps to allow you to manually set very 
accurate loops. 


In the right half of the display you will see another waveform display. This is the point 
of the loop (i.e. the point set by the Ing: parameter). As you change loop length or 
adjust the at: position, this area will display the waveform. The idea is to match these 
up as well as possible. You may use the and keys to zoom in or out of 
this display for greater accuracy. 


The EEIND] and (K=ED) keys are there to help you in your search for the perfect loop. 
The EEIND) key looks for points of equal amplitude. Repeated pressing of this will make 
the S2800 try and try again and you must judge if the loop is acceptable or not. The 

key is invaluable in creating loops. What this function does is to crossfade a 
portion of the sound before and after the loop according to the time set in the Xf: 
field next to the Ing: field. This will smooth out any glitches you may have. This can be 
very effective in getting almost perfect loops. FIND and CROSSFADE functions are 
both non-realtime editing functions and may take a few seconds or more to calculate, 
depending on the length of the sample. 


NOTE: The crossfade function is destructive and will affect your 
sample permanently. Be sure to have saved your work before 
performing a crossfade in case you don't like the results or you make a 
mistake. 





MAKING A GOOD LOOP 


Making a loop is one of the trickiest things in sampling. The trick is to match two 
points in the sample that are similar in level and tone. For example, this would not 


make a good loop: 
ai didi 


You have selected a high amplitude point in the sample and set a length that loops 
around a very quiet part. All manner of thumps and clicks would be heard and the loop 
would look something like this when played: 








Version 1.0 10/92 


52 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





In this case, the window to the right of the loop page would look something like this: 


You can see the abrupt level change. Setting these loop points may sound better 


es Bee 


however. 





and the resulting sound when played would look like this 





This is also a longer loop and so won't sound quite so obvious when held. The window 
to the right of the loop page would look something like this: 


You can see a nice smooth transition. 


Of course, there may well still be some glitches but this can be overcome using the 
crossfade key. Pressing that in this case may create something like the following: 


Here, the crossfade function has smoothed the whole thing out to create a more 
uniform amplitude. 





NOTE: Sometimes when crossfading, because part of the area chosen for crossfade 
may be slightly out of phase with the loop area, you may sometimes get a dip in level 
where they cancel each other out. This is not a fault of the S2800 but something that 


cannot be avoided. 


Using LIND) and (R=ED) are probably your best allies in looping. E-IND will look for 
good points of equal amplitude whilst will ‘smudge’ the whole thing to eliminate 
glitches, thumps and any other unpleasantness. Long samples work best with long 
crossfades whilst short loops are better suited to having short crossfades. Perfect 
results are not always possible but you'll be surprised at how easy looping can be on 


the S2800. 






lf your sample has just one single loop such as: 


ue Ride ae 





Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 53 





you can go to the trim page and remove the bit of audio after the loop as this will not 
be played. This can save a lot of memory space. 


THE JOIN PAGE 
In this page, you may join two samples end to end, crossfade them and merge them. 


This can be very interesting for rea long, evolving sounds and big, thick 
orchestral and synth textures. Pressing will display this screen: 





JOIN A then B-->J Free: 2326720= 73% 

first last scale 
A: STRING C4 0 25620 +00db: 
Bs VOICES C4 fe) 34680 +00db 
J: MIXTURE X-fade over: 4350 
- new name — Oo spl oO mx 


JOIN (A=50) SPL CMIX] 









The samples to be joined together are known here as A and B, and the resulting 
JOINed sample is called J. Though A and B can be the same sample, the resulting (J) 
sample cannot be the same as either A or B. Press the NAME key to enter a new 
sample name for the sample J. Existing samples can be overwritten and therefore can 
be used for J. 


As mentioned earlier, this page has three basic functions: to copy a part of a sample 
to another sample - - to splice a sample (or part of a sample) to another sample 
-2FLI} or to mix two samples (or parts of samples) together 


SPLICING SAMPLES 


Select the A and B samples using the DATA control. You must then choose a name 
for the J sample. This can either be the name of an existing, unwanted sample, or you 
can enter a new name using the NAME key followed by pressing ENT/PLAY. 


Now you should select the portions of the A and B samples which are to be combined 
using the first: and last: fields. For example, you may want to splice the just 
attack portion of sample A to the sustain portion of sample B, or mix just parts of 
two samples together. If you want to hear exactly what part of a sample you are 
going to use, you can set the first and last points of A, and then press - this 
will copy sample A into sample J without sample B so that you audition it in isolation 
using the ENT/PLAY key (you can overwrite J later, of course, so you’ve done no 
permanent damage to A if you get things wrong). 


Notice how the figures at the bottom alter as the lengths of samples A and B are 
changed. The figure before the spli: is the total length of the selected portions of 
the two samples (minus the X-fade length - see below), and the figure before the mx: 
is the length of the longest sample portion to be included. 


You may set the respective levels of each of the samples A and B using the scale: 
parameters but be careful you don't overload the system by setting too high a level. 


Once you've set everything, press lf sample J already contains data, you will be 
asked if you want to overwrite it (you should press GO or ABORT as necessary). 
After a few seconds (depending on the length of the samples), you can hear the fruits 
of your labours by pressing the ENT/PLAY key. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


54 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





CROSSFADING 


To avoid a sharp break in sounds when you splice them together, one sound can be 
crossfaded into another. The crossfading will start before the value set in the last: 
point of A, the time at which crossfading starts depending on the number of samples 
set in the K-fade over: field. This field has no effect, of course, when layering 
samples. 


Again, you can adjust the relative volumes of A and B by up to +25dB, using the 
scale: parameters. However, if you set these too high, you may get a distorted 
sound, so use these with care. 


When you've set up the start and end points for both samples, press RPLY). if 
sample J already contains data, you will be asked if you want to overwrite it (you 
should press GO or ABORT as necessary). Again, the process will take a few seconds 
(depending on the length of the samples and the amount of crossfading) and when 
the operation is complete, you can listen to the new sound by pressing the ENT/PLAY 
key. 


MIXING AND LAYERING SAMPLES 


It is also possible to ‘stack’ samples on top of each other. This can be an effective way 
of layering sounds without eating into polyphony. The same principles apply as above - 
select sample A and B and create a new sample J (or use an unwanted existing 
sample). You may set the portion you want to mix together (for example, you may 
want to layer the attack of one sound directly on top of another) and also set the 
levels and relative balance in the scale: field (please be especially careful here - 
because you are combining two samples together, the levels will naturally go up. If 
anything, you may need to use the scale parameters to turn them down). Once you're 
happy with everything press LMIX]. If the J sample already exists, you will be 
prompted and you should respond accordingly and, after a few seconds, you will be 
able to play the sound from the ENT/PLAY key. 


You may repeat these techniques using the J sample as the basis for a new splice, 
crossfade or layer. For example, you could: 


Crossfade a timpani strike with a deep string orchestra. Use that sample, for example, 
to crossfade with a big vocal chorus chord and use the result of that to crossfade 
with a large orchestral finale. 


Crossfade a thick synth bass with a string pad. Use that to crossfade with a 
resonant filter sweep sound and crossfade the result of that with some strange 
percussion loop. 


Layer some strings on top of a piano. Use the new sample as the basis onto which 
you layer a marimba. 


Keep layering different synth string sounds on top of each other for a huge pad 
sound. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 55 









NOTE 2: The samples always use their base note (i.e. the note they were sampled at) 
when employing any of these techniques. In other words, a string sound sampled at 
C3 and layered or crossfaded with a choral sound sampled at G3 would be a fifth 
apart. This cannot be corrected, even through tuning it in ED.2 (see later). 












NOTE 3: It goes without saying that you need to have sufficient memory available to 
create these new spliced or mixed samples. You will be reminded by the prompts if you 
haven't! 


Though the process of creating the sound you want may take some time, it’s possible 
you may discover some new sounds along the way which weren't quite what you were 
expecting, but could find a place in your work. The type of sounds created here can be 
long evolving sounds which may find a place in soundtrack work as they can be very 
dramatic. 
Let us now have a look at some of the possibilities offered in ED.2. 

EDIT 2 - TIMESTRETCH AND RE-SAMPLE 


The ED.2 page (accessed from the SLCT page) allows you to perform some further 
sophisticated editing functions such as Timestretch and re-sampling. 


THE PARAMETER PAGE - TUNING AND REVERSING SAMPLES 


The first page we see is the PARAMETERS page (the first one you access when you 
press the key) and looks like this: 


=TRItS C4 


original pitch: C_4 
pitch offseti+00.00 ‘semi.cent>) 


type of playback: LOOP IN RELEASE 
loop tune offset: +00 cents CHOLD only)dD 


Sime PARA 





On the top line is the name of the sample you want to edit. As usual, this may be 
changed with the DATA control. The parameters on this page are as follows: 


original pitch: This allows you to alter the original pitch at which the sample 
was recorded, so that when you replay it on the keyboard, it 
will play at the correct pitch. You will note that the ENT/PLAY 
key which normally plays a sound at a pitch set in the MIDI 
TRAN(smit) page, plays the sample at its correct pitch (i.e. the 
pitch it was sampled at) when you are in EDIT SAMPLE. 


pitch offset: Further fine tuning (in semitones and cents over a range of 
+50 semitones) is possible here. 


type of playback: This parameter determines the way in which the sample will be 
played back. There are four options available here. 


The first is LOOP IN RELEASE. This means that when a key 
is pressed, the sample will play through all the loops until the 
first HOLD loop is reached. When the key is released, the 
HOLD loop will continue to play as the release falls away. This 
is always selected when you make a sample. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


56 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





LOOP UNTIL RELEASE is slightly different. Again, the 
sample will play, with all loops, until the first HOLD loop is 
reached. However, when the key is released, the loop will end, 
and the remaining portion of the sample (if any) will be played. 
This is a useful setting for sounds which have a definite attack, 
an indefinite sustain period (set with the loop), and a definite 
release characteristic. For example, if you have a double bass 
sample that has an interesting and realistic finger squeak at 
the end, this type of loop may be appropriate. 


NO LOOPING does what its name suggests - it plays the 
sample through without loops for as long as the key is held 
down. If the sound is not long enough, it will finish even 
though you are holding down a note. If the sample is still 
sounding, as soon as the key is released, the sound will start 
to decay. 


PLAY TO SAMPLE END is useful for triggering sampled 
drums either from a keyboard or sequencer or by drum trigger 
units such as the ME35T and the like. Like the previous 
setting, no loops are played, but an instantaneous trigger 
signal or key press will play the whole of the sample (the key 
does not have to be held down for the whole length of the 
sample). 


NOTE: Alternating backwards/forwards loop is not available. This is due to hardware 
and not software. To have included it would have meant the loss of other features 


such as polyphony or resonance on the filters. It cannot be included in future 
software upgrades 





loop tune of fset: This allows you set a pitch shift of up to +50 cents (one 
semitone) for a HOLD loop. This function is useful when you 
have a small, short, single cycle loop that has latched onto 
some strange, discordant aspect of the sound and is slightly 
out of tune with the rest of it. 


REVERSING SAMPLES 


In the ED.2 PARAMETERS page, when the LREY] soft key is pressed, the sample will 
be reversed. Pressing it again will reverse the sample back to its original form. Note 
that any loop points you have set will stay in the same absolute positions, and will not 
be reversed with the sample. 


TIMESTRETCH 


One of the most useful digital signal processing techniques available today is that of 
time Compression and expansion or ‘Timestretch' as we call it at Akai. This technique 
allows you to alter the length of a sample, shortening it or lengthening it, without 
changing its pitch, the common problem of trying to change the length of the sample 
by playing it back slower or faster. 


Before we look at how to operate the timestretch functions on the S2800, let us first 
look briefly at how timestretch works. 


Timestretch works by instructing the digital signal processor to analyse the signal and 
insert or delete blocks of sample data at appropriate places and crossfades are used 
to make the insertions and deletions as seamless as possible. This has the effect of 
lengthening or shortening a recording. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 57 





As you can see from the following diagram, blocks of sample data have been inserted 
to create a 200% timestretch. The overall envelope of the sound data is preserved but 
there is twice as much data in it causing it to play back twice as slow. 


SAMPLE DATA BLOCKS 


ryt 


ORIGINAL RECORDING 


WITH 200% TIMESTRETCH 


In the following diagram, data has been carefully removed to make the recording play 
back faster. 


ORIGINAL RECORDING WITH 70% TIMESTRETCH 


You can see that the length in both of these examples changes quite drastically but 
the envelope remains pretty much the same, thereby ensuring the integrity of the 
sound. The timestretch on the S2800 works by making a copy of the original. It is 
necessary to make a copy for two reasons - firstly, the S2800 needs the original data 
to get the data to insert. Secondly, in the event of a stretch going wrong, you still 
have the original to revert to. 


Unfortunately, however, perfect results using timestretch are sometimes difficult to 
achieve. It is not a limitation of software or hardware but due to the fact that, 
although the processor is clever, it is not that clever and can sometimes make 
mistakes in deciding which sample to insert or remove. The end result of this is that, 
on occasions, especially with stretch factors exceeding 10% or so, you may get an 
echo or ‘flam' effect on some transients because the processor has inserted a 
transient. When shrinking a recording, you may find a transient softened because the 
processor has decided to remove it. You will find this to be the case more or less on 
all devices that feature some form of time compression or expansion. 


A lot of these problems depend on the nature of the audio material being processed 
and settings that process the spoken word perfectly could make a right mess of a 
percussive dance track. The converse is also true. The biggest problem is in material 
that has a healthy balance of low and high frequencies because different timestretch 
parameters are required to process different frequency ranges - in audio material that 
has a wide frequency composition there is much adjustment to be done to obtain the 
correct compromise so that both frequency ranges are adversely affected as little as 
possible. Please be aware that, on occasions, you may never get absolutely perfect 
results and there may be occasional side effects, especially with extreme settings of 
stretch - of course, these side effects can be put to good use for the creation of 
special effects!! Over smaller ranges, however, you will find the timestretch on the 


Version 1.0 10/92 


58 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





$2800 yields excellent results and will become an invaluable tool in your work, 
whatever application you are working in. 


You could use timestretch to alter the length of a drumloop or breakbeat without 
altering the pitch to fit in with the rest of the track or you Could use it to speed up or 
slow down a track to change the ‘groove’ or feel. You could even use the timestretch 
to overcome timing discrepancies of a ‘live’ band or use it to create gradual tempo 
changes, etc.. It can be used to change the length of, say, a backing vocal part or 
guitar solo so that it can be played back at a different pitch and so accommodate key 
changes. You could use it to maintain the same vibrato speed for a number of ‘multi- 
samples’ created from one original sample. In A/V work, it could be used for fitting 
sound effects, voice overs, etc., to video soundtracks for precise timing. In radio 
broadcast you will be able to process voice-overs to precisely fit jingles (or jingles to 
fit voice-overs!) or to process jingles to accurately fill timed advert slots. There are 
many possibilities which you will no doubt discover for yourself. 


Let us now examine how to operate the Timestretch function on the S2800. Pressing 
the key from the ED.2 page enters the TIME-STRETCH page. 


sample: Babw@arms! 
stretch zone: ¢) to: 128 
Cycle length: 1000 total: 220512 7% 


time factor: 100% norm. time= 5.00sec 
stretch mode: CYCLIC qual: 10 width: 10 
new sample: STRING C4 x*xexisting Sampx 


TIME Gi (aut C) ZONE) LGO_] (PLAY! 





This enables you to lengthen or shorten a sample or a selected part of a sample from 
25% of its original length to 2000% (twenty times) without changing its pitch. 


Two modes are available for stretching: CYCLIC, in which a fixed interpolation rate is 
maintained throughout the whole of the sample (suitable for individual instrument 
samples), and INTELL, in which the S2800 “intelligently” varies the interpolation rate 
according to the sample content (suitable for speech and music). 

As usual, you may select the sample to be edited at the top of the page. The 
parameters on this page are: 


stretch zone: Here you may set two values to set the start and end of the 
area of the chosen sample you wish to stretch. You may only 
want to stretch one part of the sample so it should be set 
here. The first field sets the start point of the stretched area 
and the to: field sets the end. You may audition the area you 
have set using the key. 


Cycle length: Here > can set the cycle length (in samples). The soft key 
can be used to help you find the right sample length. 
As with autolooping, the S2800 applies software logic to the 
sample to calculate what it believes is the right answer but, like 
autolooping, whilst the S2800 will often help you, it is not 
always infallible. The Cycle length: function only applies to 
the CYCLIC mode if timestretch. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 59 





time factor: This sets the percentage by which the sample will be stretched 
or shrunk. The range is 25% to 2000% (although we are the 
first to admit that such extremes are only going find favour 
with the truly mad!). As this parameter is adjusted, you will see 
the length of the sample changing in the adjacent 
norm.time: field and in the total: field above that. 


stretch mode: There are two ways in which you can stretch a sample and this 
is selected here. CYCLIC uses a fixed cycle time at which the 
$2800 will stretch. When INTELL is selected here, the 
$2800 makes its own decisions as it proceeds with the 
stretching process. Be warned, though! Although the 
intelligent mode will produce better results, the time taken for 
this operation is much longer than when the CYCLIC mode 
(up to several minutes depending on the length of the sample 
and the amount of stretch). 


Remember that to perform any of these operations, you will 
need to have enough free memory. 


qual: This sets a level of intelligence for the S2800 to work with 
when performing an intelligent timestretch. It sets the number 
of decisions it will make as it works its way through the 
sample. With lower values set here, it will not make so many 
examinations of the sound. With higher settings, it will 
examine the sound in great detail and so produce better 
results although this will take longer. This control only has a 
function when INTELL is selected. 


width: This sets a crossfade between the original and the inserted 
data. It is recommended that when low gual: values are set, 
this should be set high and vice versa. This control only has a 
function when INTELL is selected. 


PERFORMING A TIMESTRETCH 


Set the parameters as described above - if you are stretching complex samples such 
as breakbeats, backing tracks, drumloops, voice over, backing vocals, etc., use the 
INTELL mode of operation. For stretching individual instrumental samples, maybe 
CYCLIC will be o.k.. 


First set the zone you want to stretch in the stretch zone: and to: fields. If you 
want to stretch the whole sample (which is the usual application), this field will be set 
as soon as you select the sample. 


If you are using CYCLIC mode, then set a cycle length (or use the autC) key). If you 
are using the INTELL mode, set the qual: and width: as you think necessary 
(remembering that high qual: values will take more time). Now set the stretch 
factor: parameter, name the new sample and press LGO_J. 


If you haven't created a new sample, you will receive this prompt: 


cant replace source sample 


In this case, please name a new sample or select a Sample you know you have no 
further use for as the destination sample. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


60 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





Whilst the timestretch is processing, you will receive the following display: 


xoKokok BUSY =— PLEASE WAIT tome 


Depending on the mode you selected and the settings of the parameters, you may 
have to wait a while (several minutes in the case of long INTELL stretches). You can 
abort the procedure by pressing F8 a few times. You will see the display counts down 
in percentage the time remaining for the process. 


When the processing is finished, you can play back the original from the ENT/PLAY 
key or the stretched version from the key. If you are happy with the sound of 
the stretched sample, you can proceed to edit, trim and loop it, just as if it was a 
freshly-recorded sample. 


RE-SAMPLING 


The re-sampling page (called RATE on the soft key because we didn't have enough 
room!) allows you to re-sample your sounds at different sampling rates. This is to allow 
you to sample at anything other than 44.1kKHz and 22.050kHz and to save memory. 
High sampling rates and bandwidths are all well and good but if the sound doesn't 
have a high harmonic content, what's the point of wasting valuable memory? For 
example, you would be justified in using a high sampling rate for cymbals and hi-hats 
with their high harmonic content but for bass drums, toms, amplified electric guitars 
and the like whose frequencies may not extend beyond 10kHz, it seems pointless. Of 
course, this kind of sound can be set to be recorded at 10kHz in the REC1 pages but 
what if the sound needs a bandwidth of 12 or 14kHz? This is where the re-sampling 
or RATE page comes in. 


Pressing in ED.2 calls up this screen: 


sample: Bapeiirese) (Sar 
present sample rate: 44100 Hz 
new sample rate: 22050 Hz 
new length: 110256 = 47% 


tune offset:-12.00 semi.cent 
new sample: STRING C4 «existing Sampx« 


SLCTIPHEH| RATE C374) (223) (LG0_] PLAY! 





As usual, the sample name and free memory are displayed on the top line. 


present sample rate: This shows the selected sample's sample rate. This field is 
not accessible. 


new sample rate: This allows you to set the sample rate of the new sample 
you wish to create. This is variable between 22050Hz 
(22.050kHz) and 65000Hz (65kHz). There may seem 
little point in re-sampling upwards but it might come in 
useful if you need to transfer a sample via a sample 
editor to a sampler that uses a higher sample rate. The 
default for this field is 22050 (half bandwidth) but can 
be set as you like. This field also works in conjunction 
with the and L223] which enter three quarters 
and two thirds the sample's original sample rate. 


new length: This shows the length of the new sample. As usual, as in 


all pages of EDIT SAMPLE, you may view this in 
milliseconds by pressing the RATE key again. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 61 





tune offset: This shows the new tuning. When sounds are re- 
sampled, they must adopt a new tuning. This is because, 
when you re-sample at, say, half bandwidth, you take out 
half the data making it play at twice the pitch so it is 
necessary to offset the tuning. This is done automatically 
for you and this field is not accessible. 


PERFORMING A RE-SAMPLE 


First, create a new sample - re-sampling is a copy process and so you have to create a 
new sample by pressing NAME, entering a new name and pressing ENT. If you wish 
to use either of the two preset sampling rates, simply press either L324) or L223) - 
this will re-sample the original to three quarters or two thirds the original frequency. 
Alternatively, set a value of your choosing in the new sample rate: field. 

If you have not named the new sample you will receive the prompt: 


cant replace source sample 


and you should input a unique name. During the re-sampling process (which is very 
quick but does depend on the length of the sample) you will receive the message: 


soot «BUSY =—- PLEASE WAIT x 


When the process is complete, you can play the new sample by pressing the PLAY) 
key. 


You can use the re-sampling facility to save on memory. In the studio where you have 
time to load in new sounds this may not be so crucial but on-stage, you ideally need to 
cram as much into the S2800 as possible. Even with 16 Megabytes of RAM installed, 
there will be occasions where you need to squeeze that little bit more out of the 
samplers internal memory. In this respect, the re-sampling functions are ideal - in fact, 
given that listening conditions at a gig are nowhere near as critical as in the studio, 
you could afford to make special ‘gig disks' where the bandwidth is more limited than it 
could be to Save even more space in your memory. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


62 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





EDIT 3 - SECTIONAL EDITING, NORMALISATION, DIGITAL FADES 


ED.3 introduces new functions not previously found on the S1000/S1100. Existing 
owners of these samplers are forgiven if you have not read the previous section 
because the functions are virtually identical to the S1000 and S1100. This next 
section will be of benefit to new and old users alike. These new editing features include 
sectional editing, level rescaling and normalisation and digital fades. 


Pressing [G4 in the main SLCT page will take you to this screen: 


OF LMF IFF 1 to: SNARES1 
start: 217900 end? 34011 MONO (SAF 





Gi=igij LZIN) (ZOUT) K==> [EXEC 


This is the SECTIONAL editing page and shows a typical drum riff, something for 
which the sectional editing functions are ideally suited for editing. Whereas TRIM 
allows you to remove audio data either side of the start and end points, these 
functions allow you to remove data within the start and end points. This can be used, 
for example, to remove one single snare beat from a drumloop sample or, in 
audio/visual applications, could be used to remove a mistake or a cough in a piece of 
dialogue. You may extract such pieces of audio in several ways. You may extract it and 
leave the gap it creates or my extract it and close the gap it creates. You may 
overwrite the existing sample or you may extract the section to another new sample, 
keeping the original sample intact. There are many uses for these new functions and 
you will no doubt find your own. 


To create a sectional edit, set the start and end points as appropriate. You may use 
the LZIN) and and K== keys as in TRIM to get more accurate edits. As you set 
the start and end pointss, you will receive a screen display such as: 


SEI. OP LMF IFF 1 to: SNARES1 
start: 21700 end: 34011 MONO (SAF 


= HL CZTN) ZOUT) K==> (EXEC) 





At this point, you may like to create a name for the new sample to be copied to. You 
don't have to as it is possible to overwrite a sample with the edited version but, if you 
want to be safe, it's probably best to make a copy, assuming you have enough 
available memory. 


Now press EXEC) You will receive this screen: 


SECTION OR LMF IFF 1 tos SNARES1 
start: 21700 end: 34011 MONO 


ae ee WS 


Select: [CHOP] LCUT] EXTRI lexitl 





Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 63 





Here you are presented with four choices. These offer three distinctly different edits 
depending on what it is you want to achieve. They are: 


[exif] This will exit this screen and return you to the main 
SECTIONAL edit screen without having any effect on the 
sample. 

EXTR) This is an ‘extract’ function that will remove the isolated area 


and copy it across to the new sample. l.e: 


to: SNARE! . 
0 end: 2311 MONO CS4F 


SECT (ZN) (ZOUT) K==> EEXET] 





This is particularly useful for isolating such things as single 
snare or bass drums from a pattern although any sound could 
be ‘lifted’ in this way. 


CUT) This allows you cut the section you have marked and keep the 
gap thus created. l.e: 


OF LIMFIFF 1 to: DRUMRIFF ED 
start: 21700 end: 34011 MONO (SAF 


Sm SECT Ger (ZN) ZOUT) ==> [EXEC] 





This is good for removing offending noises from a track where 
the rhythm or pace should be retained. For example, in a vocal 
line where the singer accidentally knocked the mic stand or 
sneezed! It is also good in dialogue where you want to remove 
a cough or script pages turning. 


(CHOP) This will remove the selected area and close the gap thus 
Created. l.e.: 


OF LMF IFF 1 tos DRUMRIFF ED 
start? 21700 end: 34011 MONO C SAF 


Sime SECT (ZIN] ZOUT] K=—=> EXEC) 





This is good where you want to remove something but the 
rhythm or the pace is not so important. 


If you do not name a new sample, you will receive the following prompt when you 
press 


overwrite existing sample? GO ABORT 


Version 1.0 10/92 


64 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





Pressing GO will take you directly to the select: prompt and you may [EXTR), LCUT) 
or as you wish. If you change your mind, press 


Whilst the S2800 is processing the data, you will receive a ‘busy’ prompt. After a few 
seconds, the new sample will be shown which may be played in the usual way. 


As with TRIM, the S2800 is very considerate and won't let you ruin good loops and 
you will receive the warnings: 


'! warning !!..START in active loop zone 


'!lwarning !!.. END in active loop zone 


In this case, whatever editing action you perform will be ignored. 


Or 


As with Timestretch and Re-sampling, if you create a new sample from any of the 
above editing procedures, the original loop points will be lost and you will need to 
reset them. 


You may select to edit in mono or stereo accordingly. Of course, this only has 
relevance if the sample is stereo in which case you may prefer to edit the left and right 
channels separately. 


IMPORTANT NOTE ABOUT SETTING START AND END POINTS: The 
Start and end points are temporary whilst in ED.3. They are not stored anywhere. If 


you leave ED.3 or select another sample, these will be lost and you will have to set 
them again. 





LEVEL SCALING/NORMALISATION 


SSIS in any of the ED.3 pages will display this screen: 





Pressing 


ee TD a | to: NEW SAMPLE 
rescale value: +00dB MONO (SAF 





Same SCAL INORFA RSCU 


Here you may set new levels for the selected sample and also normalise it. 


Normalising is a technique where you can analyse the loudest part of a signal and then 
adjust the whole sound to be at its optimum level - i.e. the loudest part of the signal is 
at the unit's maximum level before distortion and the rest of the sound is brought up 
in level proportionately. This increases signal to noise ratio and dynamic range. It also 
allows you to compensate for recordings made at too low a level. This page also allows 
you to set your own level for gain rescaling if you wish. You may process in mono or 
stereo (although selecting stereo is pretty pointless if it's a mono sample!) 


To normalise a sound, simply press NORM). If you have not named a new sample for the 
normalised version to be copied to, you will receive the prompt: 


overwrite existing sample? GO ABORT 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 65 





to which you must respond accordingly by pressing GO or ABORT. After a ‘BUSY' 
message, the new sample will be displayed showing the new level. 


To rescale a sample to a level of your own choosing, simply move the cursor to the 
rescale value: field, enter a value of your choosing and press [RSCL). Again, you will 
receive the usual prompts if you haven't created a new sample to copy to and after a 
few seconds, you will see the sample scaled to the value you set. 


NOTE 1: Please be careful when using RESCALE because it is possible to overload 
the unit if you set this value too high. 


NOTE 2: Please also note that whilst normalise and rescale can save the day on 


many occasions when you have recorded a sample at too low a level, it can increase 
noise levels. For example, if the sample is very quiet, as you boost the level, you will 
also boost the noise floor. Setting, for example, a rescale value of +15dB to bring the 
level up to maximum will also boost the noise level by 15dB. Please bear this in mind 
when using these functions. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


66 EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 





SETTING DIGITAL FADES 


It is also possible to set fades on a sample. This may seem unnecessary seeing that you 
may effectively set fades using the envelope generators in EDIT PROGRAM but it 
does have uses. Probably the one that springs to mind first is where you have a noisy 
drum sample. Whilst you could ‘shape’ the noise out in EDIT PROGRAM using 
envelope generators, it means that you have to do this every time you want to use 
this particular sample. By setting a digital fade down, you can affect the sound at 
source. 


Pressing in any of the ED.3 pages will display this screen. 


to: NEW SAMPLE 
218000 MONO (SAF 





Here we see a string sample and a start and end time has been set. Pressing LGO_] 
will give you the usual prompts if you have not created a new sample to copy to. If you 
agree to overwriting the original sample or have created a new one, after a few 
seconds you will receive a display not unlike this one: 


STRING Ls to: NEW SAMPLE 
2500 end: 218000 MONO (SAF 


Sel FADE (ZIN] ZOUTIK—=—=s CGO] 





Here, you can see the sample has fades which lead up to the points set by the start 
and end position set above. You may play the sample from your keyboard or the 
ENT/PLAY key. 


lf you try to set fade times that fall within any loop zone(s), you will receive the 
following warning: 


'!warning !! ..START in active loop zone 


Or 


'l'warning !!.. END in active loop zone 


In this case, whatever editing action you perform will be ignored. 


One thing to remember when setting fades is that these will speed up and slow down 
as you play them across the keyboard range so, while it may seem a good idea at the 
time to set a slow legato fade up and down on a string sample, you may find it would 
have been better to have used an envelope generator so that attack and release is 
consistent across the keyboard range. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT SAMPLE - RECORDING AND EDITING 67 


IMPORTANT NOTE ABOUT SETTING START AND END POINTS: The 


Start and end points are temporary whilst in ED.3. They are not stored anywhere. | 
you leave ED.3 or select another sample, these will be lost and you will have to set 
them again. 





Don't forget that, if you wish, you may reference your display in milliseconds by 
pressing FADE again. This will show the fade time as it affects the sample at its base 
pitch. Please remember that this is for display only - you cannot edit in milliseconds. 


CONCLUSION 
As you can see, there is a lot one can do to modify a sample once you have it in 
memory. But the fun is only really beginning. In the next section we will see how we 


can map these edited sample out across the keyboard as well as discover many other 
interesting possibilities. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


68 EDIT PROGRAM 





WHAT 


EDIT PROGRAM 


The EDIT PROGRAM mode is where you assemble your raw, edited samples for 
playback. In the EDIT SAMPLE mode, the samples are unprocessed by envelopes, 
vibrato, etc.. If they have been looped, it is quite possible they have lost all their 
dynamics - this can be overcome in EDIT PROGRAM. Furthermore, because of 
powerful synthesizer functions, the S2800 can be used to play and process samples 
much like an analogue synth. With 2 low frequency oscillators (LFOs), ADSR and 
multi-stage envelope generators, resonant filters, panning and more, the S2800 can 
radically transform any sound offering the creative musician and programmer endless 
possibilities. 


At the heart of EDIT PROGRAM is the ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION or 
APM for short. This allows sophisticated modulation of modules in a freely assignable 
manner and virtually any modulation source may be assigned to almost any sound 
processor in mixable and invertable amounts. If all that means nothing to you, don't 
worry for the moment as we will cover it in depth in this section. In short, what it 
means is that as well as owning a superb sampler, you also have a very excellent and 
versatile analogue style synthesizer. 


On top of this, you may set sophisticated keyboard splits and layers, set velocity 
switching and crossfading, assign samples to individual outputs and/or pan them in 
the stereo outputs as well as tune and transpose your samples. You may also set MIDI 
parameters for your sample(s). 


"But", you may be asking "why have programs? Why not just play samples from EDIT 
SAMPLE?" A good question. The reason we have EDIT PROGRAM is because raw 
samples, however much you may have trimmed, looped, crossfaded, stretched, etc., 
are only half the story. With samples, it is necessary to assign them to different areas 
of the keyboard for playback - in EDIT SAMPLE, you can only play one sample at a 
time spanning the entire keyboard range. 


IS A PROGRAM? 


In the last section, we dealt with muiti-sampling. This is the technique where you take 
several samples of one instrument across its range or where you take several samples 
of different instruments (such as drums, for example). Aside from all the fun things 
you can do with envelope shaping, filtering and so forth, it is in PROGRAM EDIT that 
you map all these multi-samples across the keyboard. To do this, we place the samples 
into what we call KEYGROUPS. 


WHAT IS A KEYGROUP? 


A KEYGROUP is precisely that - a group of keys which have a particular note range 
on the keyboard. The simplest program you can have is with one keygroup in it that 
spans the entire MIDI range on C0O-G8. The TEST PROGRAM that always boots up 
into the S2800 is just such a program. l.e: 


KEYGROUP 1 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 69 





Perhaps the next level up is to have a program with two keygroups. One covers the 
range CO-B2, the other C3-G8 - this would be a simple keyboard split. l.e: 


KEYGROUP 1 KEYGROUP 2 


The next level may be a program which has five keygroups - one for each octave on a 
normal synth keyboard. Such a program may be useful for something like piano or 
strings which have been sampled on the G of every octave. l.e: 


After that, of course, it's anyone's guess what the next level may be but it could be 


something like this: 


Here we have 17 keygroups in one program - some are assigned to individual keys 
whilst some span an octave or so. Hopefully, you can now get a feel for how flexible 
the keygroup assignment can be. But there can be more to it than that. 


KEYGROUP ZONES 


Within each keygroup, you may assign up to four samples in what are referred to as 
ZONES. These can be used for a number of things that include velocity switching and 
crossfading, playback of stereo samples and layering. 


To playback stereo samples or to layer sounds or just to do a simple velocity 
switch/xfade, you could have something like this: 


G4 


[KG [ kG2] KGS] KG4] KGS}. 


Here we have five keygroups, each with two zones being used. You could use this 
type of assignment for playing back stereo samples where the left and right samples 
are assigned to their own zones (1 and 2 respectively) in one keygroup and each zone 
is panned hard left and hard right. As an example, you could have five stereo string 
samples each sampled at G on every octave which could be assigned into such a 
program. 


This kind of program is also suitable for layering sounds on top of each other. In the 
above example, four synth samples could be mapped out on the keyboard (one for 
each octave, perhaps) and zone 2 of each keygroup could also contain the same 
sample as zone 1 and these could be panned and detuned for a fat, pseudo stereo 
layered synth sound. Of course, each zone could have different synth sounds in them. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


70 EDIT PROGRAM 





This type of program is also suitable for a two way velocity switch - by setting zone 1 
of each keygroup to a velocity range of 0-90 and setting zone 2 to 91-127, you could, 
for example switch between a thumbed bass and a slapped bass or a normal snare hit 
and a rim shot using velocity. 


To round things off, each keygroup has no less than four zones and a program may 
‘look’ something like this: 


Here, we have five keygroups, each using the four zones. This may be for a four way 
velocity switch or for velocity switching between two stereo samples or for layering 
four samples together. 


The ultimate program, would be for each key to have its own keygroup with each 
keygroup containing four samples using a four way velocity switch! 


OVERLAPPING AND CROSSFADING KEYGROUPS 


So far we have seen keygroups side by side. This is usually fine for most applications 
but there are sometimes occasions where the abrupt transition between one keygroup 
and another can be a bit obvious. For example, in a strings program where you have 
five string samples each at the G of every octave, the transition between B2 and C3 
may sound a little strange. 


The reason for this will normally be that the G2 sample is transposed up by four 
semitones at B2 and so sounds a little brighter whilst the G3 sample is being played 7 
semitones down so it may sound a little duller and so, next to each other, especially 
when playing a scale, the crossover point is not even. 


To overcome this, we can overlap keygroups simply by setting their key ranges 
accordingly: 





It may be, however, that this does still not overcome the problem and so there is a 
facility to crossfade keygroups for an even smoother transition where one keygroup 
gradually fades down through the overlap whilst the other fades up thereby giving a 
smooth transition. l.e: 


[ A A Ah J 


Of course, you can use a combination of any of the above techniques and have 
crossfading, velocity switched keygroups in programs alongside layered and split 
keyboard assignments. The above diagram examples represent only part of the flexible 
program editing and multi-sampling potential of the S2800. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 71 





If all this seems very confusing, don't worry for the moment. There are many easy 
routines in EDIT PROG that allow you to edit all keygroups simultaneously or to copy 
keygroups. Key ranges can be conveniently set by playing your MIDI keyboard if you 
wish and, within a short time, you will be making programs very quickly and easily. 


If you have already owned an S1000 or S1100, then you will probably be familiar with 
a lot of what we have just seen but, if this is your first time with an Akai sampler, it is 
worth taking the time to get a fairly good understanding of these principles and the 
concept of keygroups if you are going to get the best out your sampler. 


But before we can move onto to see what making up a program is all about, we need 
to have a look at another important aspect of a program - ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM 
MODULATION or APM. 


ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION 


APM is a new concept in sample editing. Many synthesizers have had such facilities 
before but this is the first time such a concept has been introduced on a sampler. 
APM turns the S2800 into a powerful synthesizer as well as offering a great deal of 
flexibility in the manipulation of acoustic samples. 


In the early days of synthesizers, each building block of sound was referred to as a 
‘module’ and it was possible to route any module to any other. This was called ‘modular 
synthesis’. Of course, in the wrong hands, all manner of tastelessness ensued but this 
style of synthesis was both expressive, intuitive and versatile. Since those days, with 
the advent of digital synthesis, such flexibility has all but gone (although, in fairness, 
we have had enormous benefits in other ways). Now, on the S2800, many of the 
functions found on those classic synths are available again. 


On the S2800, each module (i.e. the filters, amplifiers, pitch inputs, LFO's, envelope 
generators, etc.), have several control inputs. On other samplers (and indeed even 
some synthesizers), these control inputs are fixed - that is, you have no choice as 
what you can send to them. Whilst acceptable a lot of the time, this can be a bit 
frustrating when there is some specific sound you want to make or musical effect you 
want to achieve. 


On the S2800, such control assignments are freely variable to be set by you and you 
may route virtually any controller (including MIDI controllers) to virtually any module. 
This means that, for example, you may route the mod wheel to open the filter in a 
brass program for swells and growls or you may route aftertouch to control the 
panning's LFO speed to emulate the sound of a rotary speaker speeding up and 
slowing down in a classic rock organ sound. The multi-stage ENV(elope) 2 could be 
routed to pitch and inverted for special effects whilst, at the same time LFO1 (whose 
rate may be separately controlled by LFO 2, for example) is routed to a resonant filter 
cutoff. You could use ENV(elope) 1 to control LFO1 depth for 'shaped' vibrato - all 
sorts of things are possible from the subtle to the ridiculous! We are the first to admit 
that this kind of modulation is not that useful when trying to accurately recreate the 
sound of a Gamelan orchestra but, when the need arises to create that special sound 
or when your synthesizer just isn't up to it, the S2800 will oblige you willingly - in fact, 
you may get so used to the S2800's versatility as a synthesizer that some of your 
Current synth(s) may be in the classifieds sooner than you think! 


This block diagram will help you to understand the concept of APM: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


72 EDIT PROGRAM 





APM BLOCK DIAGRAM 


EDIT PROGRAM 


FX SEND 
TO INT IND. QUT 


EFFECTS 


KEYGROUP IND. OUTPUT ASSIGN 


MASTER AUTO 
OUTPUT ie PANNING Ea 





ENV 2 ENV 1 MASTER 
KEYSPAN ENVELOPE TEMPLATES PROGRAM OUTPUT 


ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION SOURCES 





KEY —® = SIGNAL FLOW T = CONTROL INPUT 


The sources you have at your disposal are: 


No source It seems almost pointless explaining this one! It means no 
modulation source is routed! 


Nodwheel This selects the modulation wheel as the control source. 

Bend This selects the pitchbend wheel or lever as the modulation 
source 

Pressure This selects aftertouch as the control source. This is channel 


aftertouch and not polyphonic aftertouch. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


External 


Velocity 


Key 


Lfol 


Lfo2 


Envl 


Env2 


! Modwheel 


! Bend 


! External 


EDIT PROGRAM 73 





This selects the MIDI controller set in the external control 
field of the main MIDI MODE page. This can be BREATH 
(cntl#2), FOOT (cntl#04) or VOLUME (cntl#07). Using a 
MIDI merger on your keyboard would allow you to merge a 
breath controller with your keyboard and users of the Akai 
EWI MIDI wind synthesizer will no doubt be able to use this 
function to great effect when playing the S2800 directly from 
the EWI and selecting BREATH. 


This selects velocity as the controller. 


This selects keyboard position as the modulation control 
SOUICe. 


This selects LFO 1 as the modulation source. LFO1 may also 
be a modulation destination and it is possible to modulate its 
rate, depth and delay. 


No prizes for guessing that this selects LFO 2 as the 
modulation source. 


This selects the ADSR amplitude envelope, ENV1, as the 
modulation source. 


This selects the multi-stage ENV 2 as the controller. 


This selects the current position of the modwheel at the time 
of note-on as the current controller. Moving it whilst the note 
is held will have no effect - it is only its position at the point of 
note-on that has the effect. 


As above, this selects the current position of the bend wheel 
at note-on as the controller. 


This selects the current position of an external MIDI controller 
at the point of note-on as the modulation source. The choices 
you have for external MIDI control are breath (cntrl#2), 
footpedal (cntrl#4) and volume (cntrl#7). These are selected in 
the MIDI mode. 


All of these are available to be routed in any amount to virtually any source which 
include filter cutoff, LFO 1 rate, depth and delay, overall program amplitude and 
keygroup amplitude, pitch and pan position. To select them, you simply move the 
cursor to the modulation input field found on every module and scroll through the list. 


As you can see, each keygroup has these modulation facilities separately available 
allowing an enormous amount of flexibility and this, combined with the all the other 
PROGRAM EDIT functions should keep you happy for a long time! 


Version 1.0 10/92 


74 EDITPROGRAM 


OSCILLATOR | OSCILLATOR 2 PITCH MOD AMP MOD 


WAVEFORM VELOCITY veuocity wAaverogm FINE VELOCITY VELOCITY KEYGROUP 
SELECT a rune Low SELECT Tune Low mse TUN 


© O-6-0-0-0- POOOOO OO 


K& PITCH K6 AMPLITUDE 
LFO! PITCH MODUL AT! ON MODUL AT ION 
FOO AMOUNT (INPUT INPUT 
ae at. u 


VELOC ITY VELOCITY 
wid es staat pty 


5 
©): ©: bj a ©): O-0 a 
m CONSTANT CONST ANT 
> 
> 


eee 3 OSCILLATOR 4 FILTER 


wavEerorn VELOCITY VELOCITY waverorn FINE VELOCITY VELOCITY CUT OFF KEYSOARO 
SELECT a ie rue Low IB SELECT ee TUNE Low mn FREQUENCY er TRACK 


OOO0-6-6 00-60-60. O-O-O 


CUTOFF FREQ CUTOFF FREQ curorr FREO 
V@LOCITY VELOCITY MODULATION MODULATION MODULATION 
svar aise PAN STAs ee INPUT | INPUT 2 INPUT 3 
* t . * LJ a . t 


©): ‘0; - a ©: ©: db. i a 
bs CONST ANT CONST ANT 


ENVELOPE 1 ENVELOPE 2 ers, LFO2 


DECAY SUSTAIN RATE 2 RATES c na ia SPEED OCLAY iid 


OHO Oe 


—_-- EXTRA —— 
Levi 2 LEVEL 3 MOOWHEEL PRESSURE VELOCITY DESYNC DEPTH DELAY 


WAVEFORM SPEED CONTR 
OUTPUT 


O-O-O # 0-H: 


esd be OFF —. LFO! RATE LFO! DEPTH LFO! DELAY 
VELOCITY VELOCITY OFF VELO MODULATION MODULATION MODULATION 
arrace nist ens To Rn! Toke TO, Ra : el : PITCHBEND 


BEND UP BEND DOWN 


; : aa ; ‘% 
“ENVELOPE”  OWELOPE. ve ociry OO) O 
ATTACK : . . : 

Za 24-24 20 


TEMPLATE TEMPLATE TO 
SELECT ced SELECT OUTPUT 


t. a es ! ! a 
On . . . . PRESSURE PIT CHOEND 
“1 a Sao a - S . on 
2 


KEYBOARD SPAN MIDI CONTINUOUS CONTROLLERS 
MIDI SPAN LOw NOTE HIGH NOTE § 
: EXTERNAL MIDI CONTROLLER 


©O©O©O©O© ©O©O©O®Q® | ©OOOQ® ©OOO® ®DOOO®D OOOOO 


“a UJ I ; KEYBOARD PIT CHBEND MODULATION WHEEL PRESSURE VELOCITY 


MASTER TUNING SOFT PEDAL MASTER OUTPUT MASTER PAN 


sak ee INDIVIDUAL 


STEREO UTPUT UT PUT 
SEMITONE TUNING . LOUDNESS LEVEL ASSIGN LEVEL 
Ss os - po ee res Rs 
‘ ’ ’ ‘ . ° . q ° * P 
. . . . . . . bo . orr ~ ame —— oases 
. 8 ae +2 * ATTACK KG OVERLAP © 7) ©) ©) R 
; } G en: oe ne Se on AMPLITUDE AMPLITUDE AMPLITUDE ” PANNING PANNING PANNING 
° MOOULATION MODULATION MODULATION MODULATION MODULATION MODULATION 
= - & INPUT | INPUT 2 INPUT 3 INPUT | INPUT 2 INPUT 3 
C) 7 ; wl ae ‘e a af 


FILTER LISTEN SOLO 





For those of you who are used to using synthesizers, you may like to visualize the 
EDIT PROGRAM functions as a synthesizer front panel as shown above. As you can 
see, it is quite impressive. The very topmost section are the individual keygroup 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 75 





parameters and the four keygroup zones can be likened to the synths four oscillators 
(except you can supply an unlimited amount of waveforms via samples) and these 
pass through the filterand an amplifier. The middle section are the controllers that 
affect the keygroups and include the LFOs, the envelope generators, pitchbend, 
keyboard spann and the continuous MIDI controllers such as pitchbend, mod wheel, 
etc., and these can be patched to the modules as you like. The bottom section are the 
mAster functions such as temperament and tuning, soft pedal functions and master 
Output and panning. 


The above panel is much like an old modular system in that the ASSIGNABLE 
PROGRAM MODULATION allows free patching of the devices. On an old modular 
synth, you would physically connect the modules using patch cords - on the S2800, 
the equivalent is done in software. 


And don't forget, you have thirty two of these synths in the S2800! 





NOTES ABOUT ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION 


1. The modulation method used in the S2800 is not complicated. Whereas before on 
our samplers all modulation was fixed, it is now assignable. In the TEST PROGRAM 
(the default program you get when you turn the instrument on), all the defaults have 
been sensibly chosen so that, for most sounds, when programming from scratch, you 
need not worry too much (the defaults are, in fact, mostly the same as those that 
were the fixed assignments of the S1000 and $1100). 


When loading S1000 or $1100 library disks, the S2800 loads the assignments of the 
S1000/S1100 - i.e. the fixed assignments. Again, as a result, you need not worry 
about having to set these assignments yourself. On new library disks developed for 
the S2800, you will see the assignments made by our sound programmers. Please 
Study these and see if you can learn from them. 


2. It is possible to route the same controller twice (or three times in some cases) to 
the same destination. This is not an oversight but simply a way to keep things simple 
and open ended. If you were, for example to route LFO17 fo filter cutoff three times at 
a value of +50 you would simply get three times more LFO sweep. 


3. As just mentioned, you can route the same controller to the same destination 
several times. Please be aware that if you assign, for example, LFO2 to filter cuto 
twice and set a value of +50 and -50 respectively, you will get no effect as the two 
cancel each other out. 


4. You will note that assigning a particular controller to a destination WILL ROUTE 
THAT CONTROLLER TO ALL KEYGROUPS. The control inputs at any destination are 
not keygroup specific but affect all keygroups the same. 


At first, the modulation system may seem a little difficult and maybe even confusing. 
Don't worry - if you are not into programming you can largely forget about it and just 
use the defaults. Similarly, if you do not like synthesizers and prefer instead to use the 
$2800 for the reproduction of high quality samples of acoustic instruments again, you 
need not concern yourself with these functions. If, however, you are one those who 
likes to experiment with sound and tweak those knobs, we feel sure you will appreciate 
the flexibility of this method. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


76 EDIT PROGRAM 





CREATING AND EDITING A PROGRAM 


In the S2800, we always use another program as the basis for a new one. There are 
several ways you can work this. 


You can use an existing program from your sound library that closely resembles the 
one you wish to create. In the main PROGRAM EDIT page, copy this to a new 
program. This may be edited accordingly with new sample(s) assigned, envelopes 
changed, filter cutoff altered, etc.. 


Alternatively, let us say you have just taken five samples - you can create a program 
from scratch using the default TEST PROGRAM. Using this single keygroup program 
you could work three ways - you Could just have the one keygroup and set that up 
with one of the samples and then, when your happy with that, copy that keygroup 
four times and set the appropriate key span. Each individual keygroup may then be 
refined according to the sample assigned to it. Alternatively, you could simply copy 
keygroup 1 four times and, by selecting ALL, edit them together. The third method is 
where you copy keygroup 1 four times and work on each keygroup separately. 


Our sound library programmers have several ways in which they work and the fact 
that you can combine all methods makes the S2800 very quick and convenient. 


NAMING PROGRAMS - COPYING AND RENAMING 


lf you have already recorded your own samples, then this procedure should be familiar 
as it follows the same conventions. 


To copy or rename a program, press the NAME key - this turns the front panel keys 
into letter entry keys and you may type in a name of up to 12 characters (upper case 
only). The +/< and -/> keys on the numeric keypad may be used to input backspace and 
spaces respectively. When naming, you will see this prompt: 


[LETTERS » » “NAME for numbers ENT to exit)| 


Pressing the NAME key again switches the numeric keypad from letters to numbers 
and you will receive this prompt: 


| LETTERS » » “NAME for letters ENT to exit>| 


You may press NAME again to access the numeric keypad's letters. When in the 
‘numbers’ mode, the +/< and -/> keys input '+' and "-' to a name. Pressing NAME again 
reverts you to entering letters from the numeric keypad. 

Alternatively, in conjunction with the the CURSOR keys which can be used to move 
the cursor around within the name, you can use the DATA control to scroll through 


characters. 
When you have entered your name, press ENT and you will get this prompt: 


| Select: (COPY) DREN] exit) | 


Pressing (COPY) will copy the original program - use this to create a new program. 


lf the program name is an existing one, the boxed area in the bottom right of the 
screen will show: 
name: TEST PROGRAM 
*xexisting Prog 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 77 





and you will receive the following prompt: 


'! MUST USE A DIFFERENT NAME !! 


You must enter a unique new name. 


Pressing LREN] will simply rename the currently selected program with the name just 
entered. If the name exists, you will be prompted as above and you must re-enter a 
unique name. 


Pressing [exit] will exit the naming process altogether with no action taking place. 
Should you press this by mistake, you will see that the boxed area in the lower right of 
the screen still retains the new name you entered so press NAME _ immediately 
followed by ENT and make your choice again. 


DELETING PROGRAMS 


It is possible to delete programs using the LBELJ key - F8. Pressing this will give you 
the following prompt: 


| delete one program? GO ABORT | 


and you should press F7 or F8 accordingly. If you press GO, you will receive the 
prompt: 


delete 5S released samples? NO YES 


This is asking if you want to delete the samples contained within that program as well. 
If the samples are used in other programs, then you will not receive this prompt. If 
you wish to lose the samples, press F7 - YES but if you need to keep them, press F8 - 
NO. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


78 EDIT PROGRAM 





MAIN PROGRAM EDIT PAGE 


Pressing EDIT PROG/K will display this screen: 


program: BiSaMaweissiGe OX 


keygroups: 1l progs in mem 1 


samples: i listen solo: ON 


KG crossfade: OFF name: TEST PROGRAM 
Mono Legato: OFF *xexisting Prog 





MAIN MIDI WM CDEL J 


This is the MAIN PROGRAM EDIT page. Here you have access to individual keygroup 
parameters, modulation functions as well as MIDI, output assignment and tuning via 
the soft keys. The fields on this page are: 


program: 


keygroups: 


samples: 


KG crossfade: 


Mono legato: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


This shows the selected program name. Different programs 
may be selected for editing by scrolling with the DATA control. 
You may also select them using MIDI program change. 


This field is not accessible but shows the number of keygroups 
used in the selected program. 


This field is also not accessible and shows the number of 
samples used in the selected program. Please note that, 
because each keygroup has four zones, it is possible for there 
to be more samples in a program than there are keygroups. 
For example, a stereo program with 5 keygroups would 
typically show 10 samples (5 x L and R). 


This allows you to set crossfades for keygroups that overlap. 
As described above, this can be used to smooth out abrupt 
transitions between keygroups. You will note that this is a 
‘global’ parameter that affects the whole program and so any 
keygroups that overlap will be subject to crossfading. 


This special function turns the program into a monophonic 
program with single triggering. The effect of single triggering 
is that if you hold one note and play another, the pitch 
changes to the new note but the attack of the new note is not 
retriggered. For example: 





a 


=== === == 


When Mono legato: is OFF, the attack for each new note 
is retriggered. 


EDIT PROGRAM 79 


Deer 


eeeee: 


When Mono legato: is ON, when the first note is played 
you hear the attack but if that note is held when new ones are 
played, only the pitch changes without retriggering the attack. 


ee oe 
=== 


Even when Nono’ legato: is ON, playing each note 
separately will cause the attack of each note to be retriggered. 








This function is extremely useful for emulating the playing 
styles and phrasing of solo instruments such as flutes, oboe, 
Clarinet, saxophone, etc.. It can also be effectively used on 
solo and ensemble strings and brass. It is almost essential 
when playing synth bass sounds as it emulates the classic 
monophonic synth keyboard. You will find it useful too, when 
playing leadlines of any kind. Owners of the Akai EWI wind 
synthesizer will find this function invaluable in obtaining better 
expression and phrasing. 


IMPORTANT NOTE REGARDING MONO LEGATO ON/OFF 


NOTE 1: Because this function is playing a single sample (or group of samples when 
playing stereo or layered sounds) through the sustain or loop, if you were, for 
example, to do a long legato run from the top of the keyboard to the bottom, you 
would be transposing the original sample you started with several octaves down. For 
example, in a 7 keygroup flute program, if you were to start your run on C5 and finish 


at C2, the sound played on the last note would, in fact, be the C5 sample transposed 
3 octaves down - the samples in the other keygroups would not be re-triggered as you 
cross the keygroup boundaries. As a result, if you Sustained that last note, it may 
Sound very strange indeed! Similarly, if you 'trilled' between C2 and C5, it would also 
Sound quite odd (but then, so would a trill between C2 and C5!). This is brought to 
your attention so that you may make allowances when playing legato across 
keygroups. If you bear this in mind, you will find this function very useful and 


expressive. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


80 EDIT PROGRAM 





progs 


listen 


in mem: 


solo: 


This field is not accessible and shows you how many other 
programs are in memory at the time. 


This field allows you to select whether you wish to listen to 
other programs that have the same program number as you 
edit the currently selected program. The selection is ON or 
OFF. When listen solo: is switched to ON, you will only 
hear the currently selected program and when it is OFF, you 
will be able to monitor any other programs that share the 
same number. 


This function is useful if you wish to edit one program whilst 
monitoring other programs in a multi-timbral set up. For 
example, you may want to edit the attack of a string sound 
you are sequencing - with listen solo: set to OFF, you 
would be able to adjust this as the sequence is playing so that 
the attack time may be adjusted so as to make the string part 
‘sit’ right in the track. You may also use this function to edit 
one layer of a layered set of programs. 


No other fields are available on this screen. 


The soft keys along the bottom of the PROGRAM EDIT main screen are: 


MAIN 


This shows the currently selected MAIN PROGRAM EDIT 
page. 


This takes you to the parameters concerned with individual 
keygroups. These include the keyboard spanning, filters, 
envelopes, sample assignments, pitch and level adjustments, 
individual output assignment, etc., for individual keygroups. 


This takes you to the pages where you may set program 
modulation parameters such as pitch bend ranges, LFO 1 and 
LFO 2 parameters and parameters for the sostenuto pedal 
functions. 


This takes you to the MIDI page where you may set the 
programs MIDI channel, polyphony, transpose and other 
functions. 


This takes to the OUTPUT pages where you may set the 
programs overall level, individual output assignment, effects 
send level, pan position and other parameters. 


This takes you to the AUTO PAN section where you may set 
parameters that affect the program's auto pan functions. 


This takes you to the TUNE pages where you may set the 
program's overall tuning as well as select and create alternative 
tunings and temperaments. 


This is not a page key but an ‘action’ key for deleting 
programs. Its function is described above. 


We will now look at the functions of these pages. We will skip and for the 
moment and look at the function of , Me, GS sand Wi first as these 
affect the program as a whole. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 81 





MIDI 






PAGE 


Pressing EEQ@34 displays this screen: 





PUP eee CPROGRAM>) BESSRBe MES OX 


program number: 1 PLAY—RANGE 
MIDI channel: 1 low high 
Polyphony: 32 C0 G_8 


reassignment: OLDEST transpose: +00 


Bebis) (hae MIDI Ze WS 







Priority: NORM 







The top line of this page contains a field which allows you to change the program 
currently being edited. You may select different programs for editing here if you wish. 


The parameters on this page are as follows: 


program number: 


MIDI channel: 


polyphony: 


NOTE: The MIDI channei/ used for the reception of MIDI program change commands 
is set in the MIDI mode. Program change messages can be received on another MIDI 
channel so that program selection can be made independently for the MIDI channel 
set here - please refer to the MIDI MODE section for more information on the 
program select channel. 


This field allows you to set the program number of the 
program. This is the number which will be called up on receipt 
of a MIDI Program Change message and corresponds to a 
patch number on a synthesizer. Unlike a synthesizer, though, 
the S2800 allows different programs to share program 
numbers, so when a Program Change message is received, all 
programs with the corresponding number will be selected 
simultaneously. 


It may come as no surprise to you to know that this parameter 
selects the program's MIDI channel! The choice is 0M (omni) 
and 1 to 16. 










This allows you to select how many notes (1 to 32) can be 
played at a time by this particular program. This should 
normally be left at the default, 32. If the program allows a 
large number of notes to be played, in a multi-timbral setup, 
you may find notes are ‘stolen’ from this program. Use this 
function (in conjunction with the priority: — function 
described below) to prevent this. 


The most obvious (and useful) function of this field is to create 
programs for hi-hats. With hi-hats, you want a closed hi-hat to 
shut off an open or half open hi-hat that may be sounding. By 
creating a program specifically for the hi hats and setting the 
polyphony of that program to 1, you may achieve this. You 
should then give the hi-hats program the same number as the 
drums program they are presumably associated with. The same 
could be done with other percussion sounds such as open and 
closed triangles, guira, etc.. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


82 EDIT PROGRAM 





NOTE: The S2800 is capable of playing up to thirty two notes (or ‘voices’ or 
‘samples’ - call them what you will) at one time. If a keygroup is set to use fou 
samples which will all be played when one key is pressed (i.e. four zones or keygroups 
layered together), then only eight notes can be played simultaneously. If it only uses 
one sample, then 32 notes can sound at one time. Please note that velocity and 
keygroup crossfading may use two samples simultaneously from one key, which will 
reduce the polyphony of the pr 

















priority: This allows you to specify how notes will be ‘stolen’ by other 
programs if this is necessary. There are four settings: LOU, 
NORN, HIGH and HOLD. If a program is set to LOW priority, 
then notes from this program will be stolen first. If set to 
HIGH, then notes from other programs with lower priority will 
be stolen before they are stolen from this program. NORM is, 
of course, normal priority and, if any note stealing has to take 
place, this program will be affected no more or less than 
others with NORM assignment. 


If you are playing a complex piece of music using many 
programs, it is a good idea to set important, lead-line sounds 
to HIGH, and less important background programs to LOW. 


HOLD is a special priority. If a program’s priority is set to 
HOLD, notes from this program can only be stolen by the 
same program. 


reassignment: The notes which will be stolen are determined by this 
parameter - either the OLDEST note will stop playing when a 
note is stolen or the QUIETEST one. Hopefully, with the 32 
voice polyphony of the S2800, no voices need to be stolen 
unless you are driving it particularly hard. 


PLAY-RANGE This allows you to set the overall keyboard range of the 
program and this will override any keygroup range settings 
made in the keygroup SPAN page. For example, even though 
your program's keygroups may extend up to G8, if you set, 
say, C4 as the high extreme in this field, no sound will be 
heard above C4. You may use this function to create keyboard 
splits with other programs of the same program number. 


transpose: This sets the pitch of the whole program. You will note, 
however, that this is not a tune function as such but a MIDI 
pitch offset. For example, with this set to +12 and playing C3, 
you would not be playing the sample(s) at C3 an octave 
higher, you would actually be playing the samples that are 
assigned to C4. 


Remember that pressing the MIDI button will redisplay this page, toggling between 
MIDI note numbers and note names. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 83 





OUTPUT LEVELS PAGE 


Pressing the button takes you to the OUTPUT LEVELS page where you can 
control the audio output of the program from the S2800. You will receive this screen 
display: 





«PROGRAM O% 
loudness: 80 LOUDNESS MODULATION 
indiv output: OFF velocity > loud: +26 
indiv level: 590 Key > loud: +00 
stereo level: 99 Pressure > loud: +00 
stereo pan: MID 


MAIN Deg OUT EEN Ws 








At the top right of the screen is the currently selected program name - this may be 
changed and another selected for editing by scrolling with the DATA control. 


The parameters are as follows: 


loudness: Here you may set the overall level for the program (00-99). 
Using this parameter, you may balance the program relative to 
others, especially useful in multi-timbral or layered setups. You 
may also use this so that, as you select different single 
programs, the levels are consistent. Of course, live on stage, 
you may prefer to use this parameter to boost a particular 
programs level when you take a solo. 


The default for this parameter is 80. This offers the optimum 
range for velocity and other dynamics. Setting it higher than 
this will, of course, turn the overall level up but it will reduce 
the amount of overhead for dynamics. Reducing this 
parameter will give greater extremes of velocity range 
although you will note that will not be using the full resolution 
of the sampler. 


You will note that this parameter also affects the level of the 
signal appearing at the individual outputs (see below) and at 
the real-time digital audio output (if the IB-302D AES/EBU 
digital audio interface is fitted). 


indiv output: This allows you to select which of the 2 individual outputs the 
whole program will appear at. It also allows you to send the 
program to the S2800's internal effects. The default is OFF 
and you may also select 1-2 and FX. You will note that these 
Outputs are polyphonic and can use the full 32-voice 
polyphony of the S2800. 





indiv level: This sets the level of the signal appearing at the output 
selected above. If OFF is selected, then this control has no 
effect and if FX is selected, this control acts as an effects 
send level. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


84 EDITPROGRAM 





stereo level: This sets the level of the program as it appears at the L/R 
stereo outputs. Adjusting this has no effect on the level of the 
Signal appearing at the individual outputs or the real-time 
digital outputs. 


By setting this field to 00, you may use this parameter to mix a 
program out of the L/R mix completely if you are sending it to 
an individual output (see above). In this way, you may have 
some programs appearing only at the L/R outputs with other 
programs appearing only at the individual outputs. 


stereo pan: This sets the overall pan position of the program. You will 
note that this may be affected by other pan settings 
elsewhere in the program such as when the auto pan facilities 
are used or when individual keygroups are panned. 


NOTE: The above parameters of this page are duplicated in the MIX page of SELEC 
PROG. Any changes made there will be reflected here and vice versa. 
LOUDNESS MODULATION 


The next set of parameters allow you to modulate the overall loudness of the program. 
This is our first encounter of the ASSIGNABLE PROGRAM MODULATION facilities. 


There are three loudness modulation inputs and each one has a default controller 
selected. If you wish, these need not be changed - it is only in more specialised 
applications that you may wish to set something other than these defaults. The 
defaults are: 


velocity > loud: This is a fixed assignment and sets how much velocity will 
affect the overall loudness of the program. The default is +20 
which gives a sensible dynamic range although this may be 
changed if you wish. A setting of +50 will give you a very wide 
dynamic range where soft key presses will produce virtually no 
sound and hard key presses will output a very loud sound. A 
setting of -50 will give the converse effect - a hard key press 
will produce virtually nothing whilst a soft key press will give a 
loud output. At first, this may seem a bit strange to allow this 
but this does enable you to crossfade between programs using 
velocity - i.e. set one program to +50 and the other to -50. 


You cannot select any other modulation source in this field - 
this is one two fixed assignments in the APM system. 


Key > loud: This sets how much key position will affect the overall 
loudness of the program. When set to positive value, the 
sound will be louder in the upper reaches of the keyboard and 
setting it to a negative value, the sound will be louder on lower 
notes. You may use this function to balance the program level 
across the keyboard. 


You may change the default modulation source from Key to 


any you like simply by placing the cursor where it says Key and 
scrolling through the modulation options. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 85 





Pressure > loud: This sets how much pressure or aftertouch will affect loudness 
after a note has been played. Positive values will cause the 
sound to get louder as you press harder on the keyboard and 
negative values will, of course, have the opposite effect. You 
may use this function for expressive phrasing of such 
instruments as strings, vocal, wind and other such 
instruments to great effect. 


By layering two programs and setting opposite values (i.e. + 
50 on one program and - 50 on the other), you may use this 
function to crossfade between them using pressure. As an 
example, you could layer a distorted guitar program and a 
distorted feedback program and introduce the feedback 
element of the sound using pressure to create a powerful 
heavy metal guitar. 


You can, of course, change the default selection from Pressure 
to anything you like simply by placing the cursor where it says 
Pressure and scrolling through the modulation options. 


The effect the loudness modulation parameters have on the overall loudness of the 
program depends on the modulation source you select. Here are some suggestions: 


LFO 1 or 2 This will impart a tremolo effect on the sound and so is useful 
for simulating old rock and roll guitars where this effect was 
common in amplifiers. This may also be useful in simulating the 
tremolo effect found on organs. It may also be used to 
simulate the tremolo effect of woodwind on sustained notes. 
Using a triangle wave for modulation, it is particularly good for 
vibes sounds, especially those with a static loop. It is probably 
not suitable to simulate tremolando strings, however, using 
LFO modulation. Of course, it may be used for special effects. 


Nodwheel Use this, perhaps, instead of pressure. 
Bend Use this instead of pressure or modwheel. 
External Depending on the selection made in the MIDI MODE's main 


page, you could apply footpedal, volume or breath control to 
control the program's overall loudness. The breath option will 
be very popular with owners of the Akai EWI MIDI wind 
controller. 


These three modulation input sources may be combined and mixed together. When 
layering programs, don't forget that identical mod sources in other programs that 
share the same number may be inverted for crossfade effects. 


NOTE 1: You will note that if the loudness: parameter is Set to full (i.e. 99) the 
output level of the S2800 is at maximum and So you will not hear any effect if one or 
more modulation sources are applied. 


NOTE 2: In some cases it is possible to overload the S2800 and cause distortion. 
This will normally only happen with particularly loud samples recorded at full level when 
excessive modulation is applied. Increasing the filter resonance may also lead to 
distortion in some cases. If this happens, back off the |oudness: parameter. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


86 EDIT PROGRAM 





PAN PAGE 


In this page you may set the characteristics of the auto panning functions. Pressing 
will display this screen: 


(PROGRAM) TE=T FRTSFOM 
PAN MODULATION 
loudness: Lfo2 > pan: +00 


stereo level: Key > pan: +00 
stereo pan: MID Modwheel > pan: +00 


CT GES Eee Gd PAN 





As usual, the program name of the program currently selected for editing is shown 
here which you may change if you like. 


The parameters are: 


loudness: This is a duplication of the loudness: parameter seen in the 
OUTPUT LEVELS page and is placed here for convenience to 
save you switching pages. 


stereo level: This is a duplication of the stereo level: parameter 
described in the OUTPUT LEVELS page and is placed here for 
your convenience. 


stereo pan: This is a duplication of the stereo pan: parameter and is 
also here for convenience. 


PAN MODULATION 


Again, we have three modulation inputs which can control panning. The defaults for 
these three control inputs are: 


Key This selects that key position will affect overall loudness. With 
positive setting (i.e. +50) the sound will pan from left to right 
across the keyboard and, if set to a negative value (i.e. -50), 
will pan the sound from right to left across the keyboard. You 
may use this parameter to create pseudo stereo samples out of 
mono ones. For example, with samples such as piano or 
marimba or vibes, you could create the stereo effect of 
microphones being placed at either end of their keyboards to 
produce a panning effect. 


Lfo2 This will produce the classic auto panner effect with the sound 
gradually moving between left and right at a rate set by LFO 
2. You can use this for special effects, of course, but one 
popular application is to use it to simulate a rotary speaker 
effect. 













USEFUL TIP: When layering two identical samples with detune and hard left/right 
panning (see later in SMP1 - 3), using LFO 2 will cause each sample to swirl 
backwards and forwards in opposition - i.e. as one pans left, so the other pans right. 
You can use this to great effect to create very rich textures. By not setting too high a 
depth in this field, the effect can be quite subtle and produce a lot of movement. O 
course, the other LFO may also be used for the same 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 87 





modwhee|l This allows you to control pan position using the modulation 
wheel. This could be put to good effect in a solo line, perhaps, 
where, every time you introduce vibrato via the wheel, the 
sound pans around the stereo image. 


NOTE; Unfortunately, due to limitations with the panning hardware, whilst slow 


sweeps work well, fast sweeps may, on some sounds, introduce some ‘zipper noise’. 
Please be aware of this when setting pan modulation. 





As with all control inputs on the S2800, any combination of controllers can be mixed 
together. Here are a few suggestions: 


Bend Use this instead of modwheel perhaps. 

Pressure Use this instead of modwheel or bend. 

External Use maybe a footpedal to pan the sound around. EWI players 
may use breath control. 

Velocity You can use your keyboard dynamics to pan the sound around 
with loud sounds appearing at one output and soft sounds at 
the other. 

LFOt Use this as an alternative to LF 02. This LFO's extra facilities 


allow some very odd things to be done. Try applying this and 
modulating LFO1's rate with LFO so that the pan from side to 
side gradually speeds up and down or modulate LFO1's rate 
with the modwheel to emulate the slowing down and speeding 
up of a rotary speaker in an organ program. 


ENU1/ENV2 These may be put to good effect to pan the sound around 
according to the envelope of the sound. Perhaps ENV2 is the 
most interesting with its multiple rates and levels. 


! Modwheel Use this (and ! Bend or! External) to reposition each 
new note according to the position of these controller. 


And don't forget that layering samples in zones and panning them to extreme hard 
left and right will cause the two samples to crossover in the stereo image when these 
effects are applied. Layering two programs and setting the modulation amounts to 
opposite values can also yield some interesting panning effects. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


88 EDIT PROGRAM 





THE TUNE PAGE 


The next soft key is the key and this takes us, not surprisingly, to the main 
program tuning page. Pressing will give you this display: 


<PROGRAM> 0% 
C. C# D. De E F. FR G. Ge A. Ae B. 
+00400400400400400400400400400400400 

Program tune: +00.00 
Tuning template: EVEN 


ey: C 
MAIN MIDI 








We TUNE 





As usual, the program name is displayed at the top right of the screen - a different 
one may be selected if you wish. 


In this page, you set up different tuning temperaments for each program, if desired. 
lf you are playing a percussive sample (for example, congas) in one program, which 
you do not want to correspond to standard Western chromatic equal temperament 
tuning, this is where you can alter things. Select the program whose temperament is 
to be altered on the top line of this screen. Use the CURSOR keys to select the note 
on the keyboard octave which will be retuned, and use the DATA control to alter the 
tuning away from equal temperament by +25 cents (one quarter-tone). If you are 
retuning the C# key, for example, all notes played with the C# keys on the keyboard 
will be detuned by the amount you have set. You may tune the scale to anything you 
want which can be very useful for enriching orchestral sounds and also for setting 
your own special scales 


To help you with this, there are also some alternative tuning templates which are 
selected in the field Tuning template:. These offer preset tunings which you can 
apply to the program. 


The other parameter in this page is the Program tune: function. This transposes 
the program +/-50 semitones. This may be adjusted in very fine steps (100ths of a 
tone) for fine tuning the program. 


Those, then, are the master pages for the program where you can set parameters that 


affect the program as a whole. In any of the pages described, you may always directly 
access another from the soft keys. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 89 





MODULATION PAGES 


The next key we'll look at also affects the program as a whole but also has a direct 
influence on individual keygroups. These are the modulation pages where you may set 
the parameters for the two low frequency oscillators and the pitch bend. You may 
also set the parameters for the sostenuto pedal. These modulation sources may be 
applied to the filter, loudness, pitch and panning for a wide range of the usual 
modulation effects such as vibrato or for more outrageous synthesizer effects. These 
pages are accessed by pressing the key. 


Pressing the key displays this screen: 


TEST PROGRAM Bie 









¢PROGRAM> 
PITCH-—BEND 
Bendwheel up: 2 
Bendwheel dni 2 
Pressure: +00 
Bend mode: NORMAL 


TERM BEND [ar 


The first page we encounter is the PITCH page where you may set the parameters 
associated with pitch bend. As usual, you may select a program for editing at the top 
right hand of the corner. 


The pitch bend on the S2800 is no ordinary pitch bend that simply goes up or down 
as you move the wheel or lever. On the S2800 it is possible to set a different range 
for bend up and down as well as use pressure and a special mode is also available to 
make it more flexible. The parameters are: 


Bendwheel up: This sets the range for bending pitch up with the pitchbend 
wheel or lever. The range is 0-24 semitones. The default is 2 
semitones. 

Bendwheel dn: This sets the range for bending pitch down and, again, the 


range is 0-24 semitones. The default is 2 semitones. 


Pressure: As well as using the pitchbend wheel or lever, you may also use 
pressure to bend notes. The range is -12 to +12. You may only 
bend up or down depending on the selection made - unlike the 
bend wheel/lever, you cannot pitchbend both ways. 


Bend mode: This is a mode select option that allows you to choose whether 
the pitchbend will happen on all notes or only on held notes. 
This is particularly useful on sounds with long releases. The 
options are NORMAL and HELD. 


Let us say, for example, that you have a sound that has a long 
release and you are performing a solo that uses a lot of 
pitchbend. Using NORMAL, when you pitchbend the note, all 
the notes currently in the release stage of their envelope will 
also bend. Sometimes this is what you want but there can be 
times when this spoils the effect you are trying to create. 


By selecting the HELD mode of pitchbend, ONLY THE 
KEY(S) YOU ARE CURRENTLY HOLDING DOWN WILL 
BEND and all those notes you are not playing but which are 
fading through their release stage will remain unchanged. If 
you release your finger from the key with the pitchbend up (or 


Version 1.0 10/92 


90 EDIT PROGRAM 





down), as the note dies away, if you let the pitchbend return 
to zero, that last note's pitch will not change. If you release 
just one note of a chord with pitchbend up or down, if you let 
the wheel or lever settle at zero, only the notes you are 
holding will bend. 


The new pitchbend options on the S2800 allow for some very interesting 
performance techniques. By setting the pitch to UP: 2 and DOWN:12, with a heavy 
metal guitar sample, you can emulate string bending up and an octave ‘whammy bar 
dive bomb’ down. Many things are possible. 


THE LOW FREQUENCY OSCILLATORS 


Pressing will give you this screen display: 


«PROGRAM O% 
Waveform: TRIANGLE LFO desync: OFF 


FIXED UVUARIABLE EXTRA DEPTH 


speed: 50 key: +00 modwhee 1: 


depth: oo | key: +00 pressure: 
delay: 00 key: +00 velocity: 
ge Pasl bucieg LFOL 





This is the page used for setting up LFO1. Again, the program name is shown at the 
top right of the screen and other programs may be selected for editing if you wish. 
The parameters for LFO1 are as follows: 


Waveform: 


LFO desync: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


This allows you to select from three waveforms. They are: 


TRIANGLE ( “W ) - This gives a rising and falling effect. At 
around a setting of 75, this would normally be used for vibrato 
but can be assigned anywhere you like and can be used for 
filter sweeps, panning, amplitude modulation and slow pitch 
sweeps. This is a ‘bi-polar’ modulation waveform that ‘rotates’ 
around the note you are playing to give a natural vibrato 
effect. 


SAWTOOTH ( A ) - This waveform is used mostly for special 
effects. It rises slowly and falls abruptly. This is a ‘uni-polar’ 
waveform that jumps between the held note and the 
modulation level set at the destination. 


SQUARE (u) - This gives stepped ‘up and down’ effect. 
When applied to pitch it can be set to give trills or large octave 
jumps. This is a ‘uni-polar’ waveform that jumps between the 
held note and the modulation level set at the destination. 


This selects whether the LFO's (all 32 of them!) are 
synchronised or not. With LFO desync: on, all the LFO's 
are not synchronised and so give a rich texture to ensemble 
sounds when being used for vibrato. When LFO desync: is 
set to off, all LFO's are in sync. This latter option is probably 
more suited to use with synthesizer effects. You will find that 
slower LFO speeds are possible with LFO desync: set to 
off. 


EDIT PROGRAM 91 





FIXED 
There are three fixed parameters for setting up LFO1. These are: 


speed: This sets the rate of LFO1. This is variable between very slow 
for such effects as auto panning and filter sweeps and fast for 
vibrato and other effects. 


depth: This sets the output level of LFO1. This acts as a master LFO 
modulation control for all destinations that have LFO1 routed 
to them. In this way, if you wish to change the modulation 
level going to a// destinations easily, simply change this 
parameter. 







NOTE: You may find that nothing happens when you route LFO1 to a destination 
and set a modulation level at the destination's input. This will be because LFO1's depth 
is set to 00. This may seem a strange default at first but the reason is to do with the 
use of the modwheel for vibrato. In order to be able to have the modwheel fo 
vibrato as an immediate effect, the LFO depth needs to be at 00 otherwise, there will 
be constant LFO modulation of pitch. It is only when you are using LFO1 to apply a 
constant vibrato or for something other than vibrato in specialist applications that 
ou will need to specifically set the depth control here. 













delay: This parameter sets the time it takes for the LFO1 effect to 
take place after a note-on. At 00, the effect will be 
instantaneous but at 99 the effect of LFO1 to take effect will 


be delayed. l.e: j 
J 


NOTE ON 


VARIABLE 


The three fields below this apply to the modulation inputs of LFO1. Although not 
specifically named, they relate to the parameters directly to their left - i.e. speed, depth 
and delay. The default for these parameters is key so that you may affect speed, depth 
and delay according to keyboard position, thereby emulating the fact that, for 
example, high violins’ vibrato is often slightly faster, deeper and less delayed than low 
cellos or contrabasses. These parameters allow you to create quite rich orchestral 
textures where vibrato is never constant across the keyboard range. 


Of course, you may select other modulation options for these inputs. Here are a few 
ideas: 


Using LFO1 as an assignment to control its own rate will change the symmetry of the 
waveform and you can use this to create new modulation waveforms (i.e. using a 
square wave to modulate itself will create an asymmetric pulse wave). Using LFO1 to 
modulate its own output level does create an effect but this can best be described as 
subtle! Applying LFO1 to modulate its own delay is also very subtle to the point that, 
with the exception of very slow sweeps, you probably won't hear anything! 

Applying a slow LFO2 to speed will give a gradual speed up and slow down of LFO1 
rate. This can be used for special effects, especially in synth sounds - for example, 
apply a slow LFO1 mod to the filter cutoff and assign a slow LFO2 to control LFO1's 


Version 1.0 10/92 


92 EDIT PROGRAM 





speed, setting a value of + 50. Assigning it to depth will cause the effect of LFO1 to 
whatever destination it is applied to increase and decrease at a rate set by LFO2. 
Applying LFO2 to delay will only have an effect at the point of note-on. 


Selecting ENV1 or ENV2 to control speed will give changes in speed according to the 
shape of the envelope. Applying it to depth allows you to ‘shape’ the output of LFO1. 
Applying it to delay will have no effect. 


Selecting any of the continuous controllers will allow to change the parameters in real- 
time as you play. For example, routing modwheel to speed will let you change the 
modulation rate as you introduce vibrato (note that routing modwheel to control 
depth is not really worthwhile as this is a fixed assignment anyway in the EXTRA 
parameters described below). Assigning any of the continuous controllers to delay is 
not going to produce much effect except at the point of note on (pressure will have 
no effect on delay at all, by the way). 


Any of the '!’ continuous controllers will only have an effect at the point of note on as 
well - you may use these to set speed, depth and delay in real-time as you play. 


The EXTRA parameters allow you to introduce more modulation and these have fixed 
assignments which are: 


modwheel: This allows you to set the level of modulation that will be 
introduced via the modwheel. This works in conjunction with 
the depth: parameter. Even with depth: set to 00, you 
may still use the modwheel for vibrato and other modulation. 
With depth: set at anything other than 00, this will set a 
basic level of modulation that will be present in the sound all 
the time and the modwheel will introduce more again. With the 
LFO depth set at 99, the modwheel will have no effect 
because the LFO output is now at maximum. The default for 
this parameter is 30 so that modwheel is instantly available for 
vibrato without you having to do anything. 


pressure: As with modwheel:, this selects that pressure can be used 
to introduce modulation. The same principles apply that even 
with depth set to 00, you may still use pressure for vibrato 
and other modulation. With the depth set at anything other 
than 00, this will set a basic level of modulation and pressure 
will introduce more. With depth set at 99, pressure will have 
no effect because the LFO output is now at maximum. 


velocity: This allows you to use note on velocity to introduce LFO1 
modulation. With a positive value set here, playing a note hard 
will introduce a level of modulation which may be augmented 
using the modwheel or pressure or which can be modified by 
whatever mod source is assigned to the depth: parameter. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 93 





SETTING LFO1 MODULATION DEPTH 


The master output of the LFO is set using the depth: control and this has to be set 
to something other than 00 for there to be any effect unless the modwheel is moved - 
you may assign the LFO to a destination and set that destinations modulation level to 
maximum only to find that there is no effect. The reason for this is that the depth: 
control in this page is not set or the modwheel is not up. 


A useful function of this master depth control is that in the case where you have 
applied LFO1 to several destinations and you wish to increase or reduce the level of 
modulation going to all the destinations, you may change the modulation level to all 
destinations with just the one depth: control instead of having to individually adjust 
every destinations’ modulation input level. 






NOTE: Because it is felt that LFO1 will mostly be used for vibrato effects, the default 
in the PTCH page (see later) is set so that simply setting a value in the depth: fiela 
will apply vibrato. If you intend to use LFO1 for something other than vibrato (i.e. 
Slow filter sweeps, panning, amplitude modulation, etc), then be sure to set the LFO1 


parameter in the PTCH page to 00 unless you really want the sound of an American 
police siren! 






Once you have set the LFO1 parameters, you may return to the main program edit 
page by pressing GING. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


94 EDIT PROGRAM 





LFO2 


Pressing the key will take you to the second LFO page: 


¢PROGRAM> TEST PROGRAM 
Waveform: TRIANGLE 

speed: O01 

depth: 939 


delay: 90 
LFO2 Ea 





This is a simpler LFO for auxiliary modulation purposes. Whilst LFO1 is normally used 
for vibrato via the modwheel or pressure, LFO2 can be used for secondary 
modulation purposes such as filter sweeps, amplitude modulation, panning, etc.. 


As usual, the program name is displayed in the top right hand corner. The parameters 


are as follows: 


Waveform: 


speed: 


depth: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


This selects the modulation waveform. The choices are: 


TRIANGLE ( “% ) - This gives a rising and falling effect. At 
around a setting of 75, this can be used for vibrato but can be 
assigned anywhere you like and can be used for filter sweeps, 
panning, amplitude modulation and slow pitch sweeps. This is a 
‘bi-polar’ modulation waveform that 'rotates' around the note 
you are playing to give a natural vibrato effect. 


SANTOOTH ( A _) - This waveform is used mostly for special 
effects. It rises slowly and falls abruptly. This is a ‘uni-polar’ 
waveform that jumps between the held note and the 
modulation level set at the destination. It can be inverted at 
the modulation input stages of each destination to give 
downward sweeps. 


SQUARE ( 'u ) - This gives stepped 'up and down’ effect. 
When applied to pitch it can be set to give trills or large octave 
jumps. This is a ‘uni-polar' waveform that jumps between the 
held note and the modulation level set at the destination. Like 
the sawtooth wave, it can be inverted at the input stages of 
each destination. 


This sets the rate of LFO1. This is variable between very slow 
for such effects as auto panning and filter sweeps and fast for 
vibrato and other effects. The default here is slow as it is 
assumed you will want to use this LFO for such things as filter 
sweeps and slow panning effects, etc.. 


This sets the master output level for LFO2. Unlike LFO1, its 
default is 99 so you will instantly hear the effect of LFO2's 
modulation as soon as you apply it to any destination. 


EDIT PROGRAM 95 





delay: This sets the delay between a note-on occurring and the effect 
being introduced. At 00 the effect will be instantaneous and at 
99 the effect will take some 5 or 6 seconds to be introduced. 


l.e. } 
YA 


NOTE ON 


There are no modulation inputs to LFO2. ore 


You may use LFO2 for a number of things. As mentioned above, when LFO1 is tied 
up doing vibrato via the modwheel, LFO2 may be used to affect things such as 
panning, filter sweep and amplitude modulation. Of course, there is no reason why you 
shouldn't use LFO2 for vibrato either and mixing it with LFO1 as a source of vibrato 
can create some rich ensemble textures. Many interesting things are possible when 
modulating LFO1 with this LFO - at extreme settings you can make LFO1's modulation 
speed up and slow down for special sound effects or synth sounds but, if you're 
trying to breathe some life into some dead string samples, for example, you may like to 
use LFO2 to slightly modulate LFO1 thereby affecting the vibrato very subtly so as to 
eliminate the inherent ‘cyclicness' of LFO modulation. No doubt you will find variations 
of your own. 


SETTING UP THE SOFT PEDAL 
Pressing will display this screen: 


Sill mates CPROGRAM) TEST PROGRAM Ber 


loudness reduction: 10 
attack stretch: 10 


filter close: 1% 


ebis) (ass) (ese (ed SOFT 





This final page in the modulation section allows you to set the response of the S2800 
to the soft pedal (MIDI controller 67) or front panel footswitch. This can be very 
useful in obtaining better expression for piano sounds. The parameters are very simple 
and are as follows. 


The loudness reduction: parameter determines how the volume of the sound 
will be affected when the pedal is pressed. The higher the number, the greater the 
amount of volume reduction. 


The attack stretch: parameter allows you to soften the attack of the sound and 
affects the attack times of the envelope generators. Again, the higher the value, the 
greater the effect. For many acoustic instruments, especially string and woodwind 
sounds, when played quietly, their attack times also change slightly so this parameter 
can be put to good use. 


The final parameter, filter close: , determines by how much the filter cutoff 


frequency will be reduced when the pedal is pressed thereby simulating the effect that 
acoustic instruments generally lose some upper harmonics when played quietly. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


96 EDIT PROGRAM 





KEYGROUP PARAMETERS - CREATING KEYGROUPS 


All the previous parameter descriptions have so far been concerned with global or 
master changes to the program - i.e. not keygroup specific. This next section delves 
deeper into PROGRAM EDIT and examines the individual keygroup parameters. These 
include keyboard mapping, sample assignment and, of course, the filters and envelope 
generators. 


In the main PROGRAM EDIT screen, pressing will display this screen: 


KEYGROUPS O% 
Keygroups in Program 1 (47-3) 
active keygroup number: 1 
Span: C_9o - G_8 





KGRP 
This gives you access to the keygroup pages. 


The primary function of this page is to create and copy keygroups although it is also 
possible to set key ranges (although this is possibly best done in the SPAN page - see 
later). 

The parameter, Keygroups in Program:, shows you how many keygroups 
currently exist in the selected program. To copy keygroups, simply move the cursor to 
this field and press the +/< key on the numeric keypad as many times as you need 
keygroups - the amount you have copied will be shown in this field. To delete 
keygroups, simply press the -/> key on the numeric keypad. 


lf you already have some keygroups in the program and you specifically want to copy, 
say, keygroup 5, move the cursor to active keygroup number: field and select 5. 





TIP: A quick way of selecting keygroups is to hold the EDIT PROG mode Select key 
and then play the appropriate note on the keyboard. For instance, in the above 
example, if KG5 was between B4 and F5, pressing any notes in that range whilst 
holding the EDIT PROG key will select that keygroup for you. As you play the key, the 
selected keygroup is shown as is its key span. This functions works everywhere in 
EDIT PROGRAM. 












You will note one exception to this, however. If LISTEN SOLO is switched to OFF so 
that you are monitoring other programs, this function does not work, the problem 
being that the S2800 cannot get information about which keygroup is being played 
because so many programs (and hence keygroups) are active at one time. 








You may also set the keygroups note range in the Span: field but, as mentioned 
above, you may prefer to use the graphically assisted SPAN page for that, described 
next. 


Pressing the GERM key will take you back to the main PROGRAM EDIT screen and 
give you access to the other global pages. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 97 





MAPPING OUT YOUR KEYGROUPS - SETTING KEYSPAN 
Pressing will display this screen: 


edit:ONE KG LOW HIGH TUNE BEAT 
C_O G_8 400.00 +00 


Webi) (Mesa SPAN midi->span: [off] 





This is where you can set up the note ranges for the keygroup. You can see a graphic 
representation of the keyboard to the left of the screen. As you adjust the LOW and 
HIGH parameters for a keygroup, you will see its range depicted in the graphic 
representation of the keyboard to the screen's left. The notes may be represented by 
name or aS note number simply by pressing the SPAN soft key again. 


The above screen display shows a simple program with one keygroup in it. This next 
screen shows a typical program with several keygroups side by side. 









HIGH TUNE 
B_1 +00.00 +00 
B_2 400.00 +00 


edit:ONE KG LOW 
Coe 
C_3 G#3 +00.00 +090 
A_S3 
E_4 














Ge eeeetese ee eaees a! SF Gee eeeeeeeaseeetereee 


D#4 +00,00 +00 


Ol & Ah 





evans Cen nugyy ee eevee canancarany _4 A_4 400.00 +00 
Gebis) Cid SPAN midi->span: [off ] 


The parameters are as follows: 


edit: This toggles between ONE and ALL and allows you to choose 
between editing either one single keygroup or all keygroups 
simultaneously. You will find this function of every keygroup 
page and it can be invaluable in making up and editing 
programs quickly. In a complex program, you may select ALL 
to do all the basic work and then switch to ONE to individually 
fine tune the keygroups. 


KG Below this field are the keygroups and their note ranges can 
be seen alongside them. You may move the cursor directly 
down this line using the cursor keys for quick access to a 
particular keygroup (don't forget the business of holding the 
EDIT PROG button whilst playing a note on the keyboard, 
either). 


LOW HIGH Below these two fields are shown the lowest and highest 
notes for the keygroups. These may be set by moving the 
cursor to them and using the DATA control to input notes or, 
when displaying the notes numerically, you may type in a 
number from the numeric keypad. Another way to input notes 
is directly from the keyboard. 


By setting the midi -> span: soft key to ON and placing 
the cursor on the low note of keygroup 1, as you play the 
keyboard, so the notes will be entered. The cursor will jump to 
each low and high note in the list eventually ‘wrapping round’ 
to rest on KG1. This is a very fast way to set up keygroup 
note spans and a whole program can be set up in seconds! 


Version 1.0 10/92 


98 EDIT PROGRAM 








NOTE: If ALL is selected in the edit: field, changing a value in the low or hig 
fields will affect ALL notes equally. Pay attention because you could seriously affect 
your programs keyspan with one slip. You will note that this does not apply when 
inputting notes from the keyboard and midi -> span: is on. 





TUNE This allows you to tune the keygroup up or down in semitones 
and cents. 
BEAT This introduces a fixed tuning offset and can be used when 


layering samples to provide a chorus effect. Unlike the TUNE 
parameter, this offset is constant no matter what the played 
pitch of the sample is. 


midi -> span: This soft key switches on or off the facility to input notes 
from the keyboard. At first, with the function being so fast 
and convenient, it may seem a bit strange to want to disable it 
but, on the S1000 and S1100, we discovered that many 
people need-to be able to change note ranges whilst receiving 
data from a sequencer that is playing. In this case, with this 
function switched on, the sequencer would completely re- 
program the key ranges! This on/off function should guard 
against that. 


To exit this page and to access other pages, press - this will give you access to 


other keygroup functions - or press to return you to the main PROGRAM EDIT 
page and the master program functions. 


Version 1.0 10/92 






EDIT PROGRAM 99 





ASSIGNING SAMPLES TO KEYGROUPS AND ZONES - SMP1 


Before we look at the filters and envelopes, we need first to look at assigning samples 
into the keygroups. This is done in the SMPL page. Pressing E gives this display: 









C_O - G_8 KG: MY ED: ONE TEST PROGRAM Biers 
zn sample U-lo VU-hi pitch 


1 SINE O 127 TRACK Xfd 

2 ? 9 O TRACK ON 

3 ? 9 Oo TRACK 

4 ? 9 O TRACK 1234 


Webs) Saal SMP 1 


This is SMP1 (the first page to do with assigning samples - there are three in total). 
Here, for the first time, we catch a glimpse of the zones mentioned at the start of this 
section. In this example, the test program has one sample in it in zone 1. This has a 
velocity range of 1-127 and so will play across the entire keyboard. Compare that 
with this screen which shows a typical three way velocity switch for a bass program: 


C_O -G_8 KG: BY ED: ONE SLAP BASS 1 Ox 
zn sample VYU-lo V-hi pitch 








1 SOFT BASS Oo 65 TRACK Xfd 
2 HARD BASS 66 95 TRACK ON 
3 PULL BASS 96 127 TRACK 
? 2 Bad TRACK 1234 


TEV (Sa SMP 1 


Here you should be able to get a feel for the concept of 'zones'. We have three 
separate samples SOFT BASS, HARD BASS and PULL BASS and their velocity 
ranges are split 0-65, 66-95 and 96-127. You will also note the nice graphic depiction 
alongside it for each of the three zones! Playing within those velocity ranges will play 
each sample accordingly allowing you to emulate the many tones available from just 
one note of a real bass guitar. 


If the velocity ranges overlapped (i.e. 0-70, 63-100 and 93-127) Xfd (seen to the left 
of the graphic display) is switched to ON, then the velocity zones will crossfade giving 
a smoother response in some cases. 


NOTE: If you play between two overlapping ranges (i.e. in the above example, if you 
play at a velocity of 96), you will actually be playing two voices out of the possible 32. 


With such generous polyphony, this shouldn't be a problem unless you are driving the 





Another way to use the zones is for stereo samples and for layering sounds. For 
example: 


C_O -G_1 KG:§E§ ED: ONE Ox 
zn sample V-lo VU-hi pitch 

1 PIANO Cl -L oO 127 TRACK Xfd 

2 PIANO Cl -R oO 127 TRACK ON 

3 7 © Oo TRACK 


4 2? 9 6 TRACK 1234 
CE GE smP1 Ee Es 







This shows the assignment for a stereo piano sample. The left and right samples are 
assigned to zones 1 and 2 respectively and both given a range of 0-127. These two 
zones would be panned hard left and hard right in SMP2 (see below) to give stereo 
reproduction through the L/R outputs. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


100 EDIT PROGRAM 


NOTE: For stereo samples to play in stereo, they must be in the same keygroup and 
set up as shown above. 


For layering sounds, you might like to set something like the following: 








C_O -G_1 KG:ME§ ED: ONE O% 
zn sample VY-lo V-hi pitch 

1 MOOG STR Cl © 127 TRACK Xfd 

2 MOOG STR Cl © 127 TRACK ON 

= ) © TRACK 

4 0 © TRACK 1234 
SMP1 Ella Bilas 







Here we have assigned two identical synth samples to zones 1 and 2 and, as in the 
stereo program above, both have a velocity range of 0-127. In the SMP2 page, these 
can be detuned against each other and panned hard left and right to create a fat, 
warm, pseudo-stereo synth sound. This is a quick way of achieving this kind of sound. 
Of course, they don't have to be identical samples - anything will do. The trick with 
this method is that both samples share the same processing with the filters and 
envelope generators making adjustment and editing very simple. 


lf you want to be more adventurous, you could use totally separate keygroups for 
layering synth sound (or acoustic sounds, for that matter) and each could have 
different envelope and filter characteristics. 


The parameters in this page are: 


CO - G_I This shows the current keygroup's key range as set in the 
SPAN page. It can be altered here if you wish. 


KG: This shows the currently selected keygroup and allows you to 
select others using the DATA control. As always in PROGRAM 
EDIT, you may quickly select a keygroup by holding the EDIT 
PROG select key and playing an appropriate note on the 
keyboard. 


AF Here you can select to edit one or all keygroups. 





Of course, as usual, the name of the current program is shown at the top right hand 
of the screen. 


zn This shows the four zones in the column below. You will notice 
that in all SMP pages, as you play, a small dot appears 
alongside the zn field to signify which zone is playing - this is 
useful in identifying which sample is playing in a complex 
velocity switched program. 


sample This shows the sample(s) currently assigned to the zone(s). If 
a sample name is assigned but it does not exist in the S2800's 
memory, a "?" will appear alongside it to indicate that it is 
missing. To assign a sample, simply move the cursor to this 
field and scroll through the available samples in memory with 
the DATA control. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 101 





To delete a sample from a zone, simply move the cursor to it, 
press NAME and replace the name with blanks. To erase a 
group of samples in the same zone in different keygroups, do 
the same but with ALL selected. 







USEFUL HINT FOR ASSIGNING SAMPLES! Assuming you have a lot o 
samples to assign and you have made up a program with sufficient keygroups, go to 
keygroup 71 and press MARK/#. Now move the cursor to the sample assign field below 
and Select the first sample. NOW PRESS JUMP? - this will take you to the KG field 
again and select another keygroup. Now press JUMP again to toggle you back to the 
sample assign field and select your next sample, press jump, new keygroup, jump, new 
sample, etc.. Once you get some practice you can assign the samples to quite a 
complex program in no time at all. Please note, that if you record (or load) you 
samples in the order they are to be assigned, then the process is even quicker. 










V-lo This sets the low velocity range for the zones. 
U-hi This sets the high velocity range for the zones. 
pitch This allows you to select between TRACK and CONST. When 


TRACK is selected, then the sample can be played across the 
keyboard range as normal. When CONST is selected, then the 
sample(s) will play at a constant pitch of C3. 






USEFUL TIP TO DRUM SAMPLISTS! Sample all your drums on C3 in EDI 
SAMPLE, assign them to any key you like in EDIT PROG and simply switch on 
CONST for all keygroups. They will now play back at exactly the pitch they were 
sampled at. In this way, you don't have to worry about setting notes when sampling 
and then trying to match them up in EDIT PROGRAM. Other non-pitched samples 
Such as sound effects, breakbeats, drum loops, etc., can be treated the same way. 








As mentioned before, there is a small box to the right of the screen that displays 
graphically the status of the four zones’ velocity ranges 


SMP2 


Once you have assigned your samples, you may go to the next sample page by 
pressing Eisia’a. Here you may tune and pan your samples. You will get this screen: 


C_O -G_8 KG: J ED: ONE Ox 
zn 6semcnt loud filt pan out playback 
+00.00 +00 +00 MID OFF AS SAMPL 
+00.00 +400 +00 MID OFF AS SAMPL 


+99,00 +00 +00 MID OFF AS SAMPL 
+00. 00 Re oy cae OFF AS SAMPL 


—_ gy SMP2 





The top line of the screen is exactly as in SMP1 and displays the currently selected 
keygroup's note range and keygroup, whether you are editing one individual keygroup 
or all of them as well as the program name. The other fields are: 


zn Again, this shows the zone number in the column below. 
sem.cnt This column allows you to tune each sample in each zone 


separately. You may tune the sample in semi tones and cents 
over a very wide range. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


102 EDIT PROGRAM 





loud 


filt 


pan 


out 


playback 


Version 1.0 10/92 


You can fine tune the loudness for each zone in each keygroup 
to balance them up against each other. You will note that if 
the master loudness parameter in the OUT page of the main 
PROGRAM EDIT screen is set to 99, this control will only 
have effect downwards (i.e. when setting a -value). 


This parameter allows you to fine tune the filter cutoff slightly 
to maintain a consistent tone between keygroups. 


This allows you to pan each zone in each keygroup between 
the main L/R outputs. 


This allows you to assign each zone in each keygroup to its 
own output for separate processing on an external mixing 
console if you wish. This has a relationship with indiv 
output: field found in the OUTPUT LEVELS page. 


lf the whole program is assigned to an individual output, that 
output will be shown here - i.e. if the program is set to appear 
at output 1, then 1 will be shown for every keygroup here. 
You may change this per keygroup so that whilst some sounds 
come out of 1, other keygroups appear at other outputs 2. 
This is particularly useful on drums where you often need to 
mix drums through an external mixer to add EQ, reverb, 
compression, etc.. 


Even if the main indiv output: field is set to OFF or FX, 
you may route individual keygroups to separate outputs. This 
may be useful in a drum program where things like toms, 
cymbals and some percussion appear at the S2800'S stereo 
outputs whilst important drums like bass drum and snare are 
assigned to appear at individual outputs. 


You may also route individual keygroups to the S2800's 
internal effects. 


You will note that whatever the output assignment is here, the 
level is taken from the master OUTPUT LEVELS page and is 
set at the indiv level: field. 


This allows you to change the loop and playback 
characteristics of the sample. Normally, these are set in ED.2 
of EDIT SAMPLE but they may be changed here if you wish. 
This will not affect the ‘raw’ samples’ loop and playback 
characteristics but can be used within the context of particular 
programs. This eliminates the need for copying the same 
sample several times (and hence wasting memory) to achieve 
the same effect. The options available to you are: 


AS SAMPLE plays back the sample exactly as set up in the 
ED.2 page (loops included). 


LP in R is the same as the LOOP IN RELEASE mode of the 
ED.2 page. 


LP til Ris the same as LOOP UNTIL RELEASE. 


EDIT PROGRAM 103 





SMP3 


NO LOOPS is self-explanatory! 
TO END is the same as the ED.2 PLAY TO SAMPLE END. 


The ability to reset the playback parameters of a sample allows 
you a lot of flexibility - the same sample can be used in 
different ways in different programs. 


Pressing takes you to the last of the three sample pages in PROGRAM EDIT. 
here you may set velocity start time for the sample(s) assigned to the currently 
selected keygroup. The screen display looks like this: 

C_0-G_8 KG: BBW ED:ONE BERS Ox 
zn vel>dstart 










1 = =+0000 
2 +0000 
3S = +9000 
4 +0000 







CEG) Cried Ba Sd SNPS 





This page allows you to determine the way in which velocity affects the playback 
starting point for each sample in a keygroup. This figure is variable from +9999 to 
-9999. The higher the positive number, the earlier in the sample playback will start 
relative to the key velocity (i.e. a high key velocity will start playback earlier in the 
sample). A negative number has the opposite effect (a high key velocity will start 
playback later in the sample than a low key velocity). This effect is particularly useful 
for simulating percussion instruments (try it with a bass drum). It can also be very 
effective with such instruments as a heavily bowed cello - by setting a high positive 
value, hard keystrokes will play the aggressive bowing whilst soft keystrokes will not. 
The same could be done with overblown saxes or flutes. Something similar could be 
done with synth bass samples. 


No other functions are available in this page. 
In all of the sample pages, you may select between them via the three SMP soft ua 
To return to the keygroup screen to access the other keygroup functions, press 


and to return to the main PROGRAM EDIT screen to access the ‘global’ program 
functions, press 


Version 1.0 10/92 


104 EDIT PROGRAM 





THE FILTERS 


Pressing displays the main keygroup function select where you may access the 
last of the EDIT PROGRAM functions discussed here, the filter and the envelope 
generators: 


TEST PROGRAM Bey 
Keygroups in Program 1 (C(+,-3 
active keygroup number: 1 
Span: C_O - G_8 


Gri) KGRP Sine Fae Se 





From this page press the key to take you to the filter page: 













—URis =KG: BBY ED: ONE TEST PROGRAM 
C_O - G_8 


frequency: 99 velocity > freq: +00 
key follow: +12 Lfo2 > freq: +00 
resonance: 9 Env2 > freq: +00 


Gebi) ad FILT ENU1 ENU? 


Ox 





The S2800 is equipped with 12dB/octave lowpass resonant filters as found on many 
analogue synthesizers. As well as using them for the tonal modification of acoustic 
samples, they also allow you to totally transform a sound. 


‘Lowpass' means that the filter will allow low frequencies to pass through unaffected 
whilst high frequencies are removed. 


CUTOFF FREQUENCY 


HARMONICS 


rm en 


FREQUENCY 


As the cutoff frequency is moved downwards, so high frequencies are gradually 
removed. 


CUTOFF FREQUENCY 


HARMONICS 


Yo 


FREQUENCY 


-meome 


This is very convenient when dealing with samples of acoustic instruments because as 
notes die away, they tend to lose their higher frequency content first. By applying an 
envelope generator to the filter's cutoff frequency, we can emulate that on the 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM _ 105 





sampler. Another property of sound is that when it is played loud (ff) it is generally 
brighter than when it is played softly (pp). Using the filter and applying velocity (or 
controlling the output of the filter's envelope generator using velocity) we can have a 
certain amount of control over tonal dynamics as well. 


The S2800's filters are equipped with resonance. This allows you to selectively boost 
the area around the cutoff frequency thereby boosting certain harmonics. 


CUTOFF FREQUENCY 
a WITH RESONANT 
PEAK 






ae is ee <a 0 oe 


FREQUENCY 


Although it has some uses when trying to accurately reproduce some acoustic 
samples, its use is more suited to synthesizer effects. You will note, however, that 
when resonance is used, because of the gain increase that takes place, it can be easy 
to overload the output stages of the S2800, especially with certain sounds. As a 
result, take care to watch levels. The distortion produced by digital circuitry is not as 
pleasant as that produced by the old synths (unfortunately!!) so we can't expect the 
pleasant overdriven sound from a sampler - if you are after that sound, then sample 
the distortion from the synth! 


Let's now have a look at the filter's parameters. 


The parameters across the top of the page follow the usual convention and allow you 
to select the keygroup for editing, select whether you wish to edit just one keygroup 
or all keygroups simultaneously and, of course, you can select another program for 
editing if you wish. The other fields on this page are: 


C_O - 6_8 This shows the current keygroups key range. 


frequency: This allows you to set the filters cutoff frequency. As you 
decrease this from 99, you will remove the upper harmonics 
resulting in a softer tone. This can be used to great effect on 
acoustic instruments (especially those that have ben looped) 
with velocity and envelope shaping to restore the natural 
harmonic dynamics and movement to the sound. On synths, 
you may sweep this with all sorts of controllers for a wide 
range of synth sounds. 


key follow: Here you may set the keyboard to track the filter. This is so 
that you can achieve an even tone across the keyboard range. 
+12 is the default and this tracks the filter octave for octave - 
i.e. for every shift of pitch of one octave, there is an 
according shift in harmonics. 


resonance: This allows you to sharpen the point at the cutoff frequency 
thereby emphasizing the harmonics at that point. The sound 
changes from a soft 'waaa' effect to the characteristic 'weeow' 
effect with high resonance settings. The range is 0-15. High 
resonance settings can be used for classic synth bass sounds 
and, simply by sampling raw synth waveforms (i.e. without 


Version 1.0 10/92 


106 EDIT PROGRAM 





using the synths filter, etc.), these may be used as the basis 
for some powerful synth sounds through these filters. 


NOTE: When increasing the resonance, depending on the sound, some very loud 


peaks may be created as certain strong harmonics get boosted. This can result in 
distortion. To reduce any distortion you may have, reduce the loudness control in the 


NOTES ABOUT THE FILTERS 


Owners of S1000's and S1100 may sometimes notice a slight difference in sound 
quality when comparing between those samplers and the S2800. This is because the 


S2800's filters are totally different. Whereas the S1000/1100 used 18dB/octave filter, 
the S2800 uses 12dB/octave filters. The effect of this is that the S2800's filters let 
through a few more harmonics than the S1000 and S1100 and so, some sounds may 
sound different. 


Also, if any S1000/S1100 sounds use the filter dynamically, then the effect is likely to 
a little bit different when played back on the S2800. 


This is not an incompatibility but is something you should be aware of should you 
notice it. In the event you get this, simply back off the S2800 filter a little - this should 
overcorne it. 





The next three parameters down the right hand side are the modulation inputs to the 
filter. The defaults for these are velocity, Lfo2 and Env 2 (similar to the S1000 
and S1100) respectively. These may be mixed and the range for each modulation input 
is the usual +/-50. You will note that for there to be any effect, the frequency: 
parameter should be set to something lower than 99. 


With velocity set to a high positive value, you may use velocity to control tone 
colour much like you would find on an acoustic instrument with louder notes yielding 
brighter sounds and, of course, vice versa. Lfo2 may be used for filter sweep effects 
such as flute tremolando or drastic resonant synth effects whilst Env2 is used for 
shaping the tonal dynamics of the sound and restoring lost harmonic movement due 
to looping. The multi-stages of Env2 allow some interesting possibilities as we shall 
see in a moment. The other options which you may select for modulating the filters 


are: 

Nodwheel This works much like pressure and moving the modwheel will 
cause the filter cutoff to open and close. Use this for phrasing 
brass parts, perhaps, or for special synth filter effects in a 
bass line or lead line. 

Bend This works like pressure and modwheel and allows you to open 
and close the filter by moving the pitch bend wheel or lever. 
This can be effective when bending up into a note as the filter 
will open and sound brighter. 

pressure: This may be used for expressive swells, particularly on brass 
sounds. 

External This can select from footpedal, volume and breath for control 


of the filter cutoff. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 107 





Key 


Lfol 


Env 


! Modwheel 


Although selectable as a mod source, it is not that worthwhile 
because this is hardwired via the key follow parameter. 


This allows you to emulate the natural tremolo of flutes, 
woodwind, brass and other such instruments when set to 
small modulation amounts. When set to large modulation 
amounts, classic synth filter sweeps can be achieved. That 
LFO 1 can also be modulated leads to some very interesting 
synth sounds and special effects. 


On occasions, it is good to be able to have the filters tonal 
dynamics match those of the amplitudes. One easy way to 
achieve this is, instead of copying the amplitude envelope to 
the filters envelope, simply assign the amplitude envelope to 
the filter. 


This and the other “!" controllers allow you to control the 
opening and closing of filter cutoff at the point of note on. 
They don't have any effect if these controllers change through 
the course of the note but only when the note is pressed. 


THE ENVELOPE GENERATORS 


ENV1 


To set the envelopes for the sound you have two ways in - you can either go to the 
envelope pages via the KGRP page or, if you are in the filter page, you have direct 
access to them there for convenience. Either way, let's have a look at ENV 1. 


- SHAPING AMPLITUDE 


However you arrive at this page, whether its through the KGRP page or directly from 
the filter page, the screen looks like this: 


Attack: 

Decay: 

Sustain: 
Release: 4 


MAIN FILT ENV1 ENU? 





SU KG: BY ED: ONE 3«S Se 
C_9 - G_8 template: ENV 1 


=) 
2 


Here we have the normal parameters across the top of the page where you may select 
your keygroup, whether one or all keygroups are being edited and the program name. 
Also, beneath that you can see a graphic representation of the envelope. The keyspan 
is also shown and this may be changed here if you wish. The other parameters are: 


template: 


This calls up a series of preset envelope templates that have 
been set within the software of the S2800. You can use these 
to get close to the type of envelope you are after and then 
maybe fine tune them afterwards if needs be. ENV1 is the 
‘manual’ envelope - i.e. the one you can program yourself. If 
you edit a preset envelope, you will note that it immediately 
become ENV1, the programmable envelope. 


You will notice that any envelope you create is not lost when 
you select a preset - ENV1 (your own envelope) is always 
retained as you scroll through the list of available envelopes 
although ENV 1 will be lost if you edit a preset. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


108 EDIT PROGRAM 


NOTE: Should you select a preset and then leave this page, when you return, you will 
note that the template is renamed and becomes ENV1. 





Attack: This sets the time the envelope will take to reach full level. 

Decay: This sets the time it will take to reach the sustain level. 

Sustain: This sets the level at which the note will sustain while a key is 
held. 

Release: This sets the time it takes for the sound to fade away after the 


note has been released. 
This forms the basis of an ADSR envelope generator for shaping amplitude. This 
envelope generator is hardwired to amplitude control and so always sets the sounds 
overall envelope. 


These are the most commonly used parameters in the envelope. Other, less frequently 
used controls, are on a second page should you need them. 


Pressing calls up this screen: 








(FM KG: MY ED:ONE ROS 
C_90 - G_8 velocity> attack: +00 
velocity>release:? +00 

off velocity>Jrelease: +00 

key> decay & release: +00 


attack hold: OFF 
Cr ES ee 








SY envi Gila Byrme 





Once the basic envelope has been set up, these other factors can be used to affect 
the speed of the envelope. 


velocity > attack: This is variable from +50 to -50, and determines the 
amount by which the attack speed will be changed 
depending on the Note On velocity. A positive value 
will increase the attack time if the key is pressed fast, 
while a negative value will slow down the attack rate 
if the key is pressed fast. Setting a positive value 
here is the most commonly used way of using this 
parameter and is useful for imitating the 
characteristics of some acoustic instruments (for 
instance, most wind instruments have a faster attack 
rate when played loudly). 


velocity > release: This is used to vary the release rate relative to the 
Note On velocity value (+50 to -50). Again, a 
positive value will increase the release rate relative to 
the Note On velocity, and a negative value will 
shorten the release time. 


off velocity > release: This is possibly more relevant to natural-sounding 
playing. The MIDI specification allows for Note Off 
velocity as well as Note On velocity. Though some 
keyboards do not accept or transmit this, assuming 
a mean value of 64, all AKAI keyboards provide a full 
implementation of this function. The speed with 
which the key is released can be used here to affect 


Version 1.0 10/92 





ENV2 


key > decay 


attack hold: 


Attack 


EDIT PROGRAM 109 


the release rate (positive values mean that a fast 
release lengthens the release rate, and vice versa). 
This allows more expressiveness and realism, but 
demands a slight re-learning of keyboard technique 
(similar to an acoustic piano). 


& release: This allows you to control the amount by which the 
key position affects the decay and release rates. 
Setting this to a negative value means that the 
higher the note played on the keyboard, the shorter 
the decay and release times (similar to most acoustic 
instruments). This can be used to good effect on 
marimbas and other such percussive sounds and can 
be effective on piano sounds too. Setting this 
parameter to a positive value will reverse this effect. 


can be set to ON or OFF. When ON, the attack 
portion of the envelope will be held until looping 
begins, and when OFF, the envelope will continue 
along the set values, regardless of loop settings. l.e: 


Loop Loop 










Attack HOLD: ON Decay 


Sustain 


SHAPING THE FILTER 


Access to ENV2 is also via the KGRP or FILT page. However you arrive there, the 
screen looks like this: 


ENUZ KG: BBY ED:ONE ime «(Ox 
C_9o - G_8 template: ENV 2 


Ri: OO LI: 99 
| R3: 50 L3: 99 
R4: 45 L4: 45 





MAINT KGRP EF ILT ENU1 ENU2 


This is a 4-stage envelope generator with 4 rates going to 4 levels. Basically, Rate 1 
goes to Level 1, Rate 2 to Level 2, Rate 3 to Level 3 (which is also the sustain) and 
Rate 4 goes to Level 4. Again you have a choice of templates from which to choose a 
variety of preset envelopes (probably a bit more necessary in light of the added 
complication of a multi-stage envelope) and this works on the same principle as 
ENV1's templates except that there are more of them. 


Some of the possible envelope shapes you can create using envelope 2 are shown 
below: 


I~ A~7 MN A~ LY 


Version 1.0 10/92 


110 EDIT PROGRAM 





The second page of envelope parameters can be accessed by pressing EGM4. You will 


receive this screen: 


C 





KG: ED: ONE 





velocity> envelope: +00 


MHIH FILT 













velocity>R1: +00 
velocityu>R4: +00 
off velocityu>R4: +00 
key>R2 & R42 +00 





O% 








EMU env2 


Here we have similar parameters to ENV1. 


velocity > RI: 


velocity > R¢4: 


off velocity > R4 


key > R2 & R4: 


velocity > envelope: 


This sets how much velocity will determine the speed 
of rate 1. 


This sets how much the note-on velocity will affect the 
speed of rate 4. 


This sets the amount by which MIDI note off velocity 
will affect the speed of rate 4. 


This will set how much key position will affect both 
rate 2 and rate 4. 


This sets how much velocity will control the modulation 
output of ENV2. This parameter can be used very 
effectively in regulating dynamics through key velocity. 
All parameters’ ranges are +/-50. 


USING THE FILTER AND ENVELOPE GENERATORS 


One of the inherent problems of sampling is that, because of memory limitations, it is 
usually necessary to to loop a sample. This often has the effect of reducing (or even 
removing!) the sound's natural dynamics making the sample more like a snapshot than 


a movie. 


To overcome this, however, we can use the filters and the envelope generators to 
restore some of those attributes. 


By bringing the filter cutoff frequency down and using note-on velocity as a 
controller, you can emulate the characteristics of most, if not all acoustic sounds 
where loud notes are brighter in tone than quiet ones. Controlling the output of 
ENV2 using velocity and applying that to the filter is another way of doing this. 
Furthermore, another natural property of sound is that during a note, the tonal quality 
changes. We can use envelopes and low frequency oscillators to restore some of 
those qualities. Usually, the filter will use the multi-stage ENV2 as its controller 
because tonal changes are usually more complex than amplitude changes in acoustic 
sounds. This envelope can also be used to imitate such things as brass growls - to 
actually sample a brass growl would not only take up memory but would speed up and 
slow down as you play it across the keyboard. ENV2 could be applied to an ordinary 
brass sample and set so that Rate 3 swells back up from a low Level 2 to not only 
recreate this effect but also to keep the swell at a constant rate across the keyboard. 
Pressure may also be used for the same effect although you would be controlling the 
growl - this may be preferable to the ‘automated’ quality a preset envelope rate would 


have. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


EDIT PROGRAM 111 





Of course, once you are in the realm of sampling synth waveforms and processing 
them through the filter, you are in different territory but anyone who has used an 
analogue synth will feel instantly at home with the S2800's filter and envelope section. 
The only difference here, however, is that instead of relying on a handful of 
waveforms, any sampled sound may be used as the source. It is here that the 
modulation possibilities can be used to good effect in the creation of new sounds (and 
the recreation of a few classic old synth sounds too!) 


Having the filters, envelope generators and comprehensive modulation facilities in the 
S2800 means that instead of having to sample an entire synth sound, you can simply 
sample the 'raw' waveforms and apply all the other synth processing in the S2800. 
There are several ways this can be done - you could either sample multiple detuned 
oscillators or you could sample individual oscillators and then layer them in the S2800. 
This might be preferable in a way as single waveforms can easily be looped and take up 
virtually no memory space (*). With digital synths, you can take the basic waveform 
material and build up a huge array of waveforms to use as the basis of your synth 
sounds. 







* NOTE: Sampled waveforms do not detune in quite the same way as analogue 
synths. On analogue synths, there are all kinds of pleasant distortion artefacts that 
give the sound character - in some cases it is best to sample that distortion. Note also 
that sampled waveforms transposed up and down the whole range of the keyboard 
do not sound quite the same as ‘the real thing' so it is probably best to multi-sample 
these for best results. 








KEYGROUP PITCH/AMPLITUDE MODULATION 


The final page in PROGRAM EDIT is where you may assign modulation to pitch and 
amplitude for individual keygroups. This is accessed via the KGRP page by pressing 
PITCH] You will receive this screen display: 


Meee KG: BBY ED: ONE BESO 
C_.0-G.1 






LFO1 > pitch: +50 
Env2 > pitch: +00 








Velocity > loudness: +00 


Cr) Ree ES) laa PTCH 





Along the top of the screen we have the usual parameters for selecting the keygroup 
and the program. The other parameters on this page are: 


LEOT > prteh: This is a fixed, preset assignment that routes the LFO to 
pitch. This is done to maintain compatibility between the 
$1000/S1100 and the S2800. It is also done to maintain 
ease of use when setting up vibrato. 


The range for this parameter is +/-50 allowing inverted pitch 
effects to be created (especially useful when using square 
and sawtooth waves) and the default for this parameter is 
+50. This means that the modwheel is always active for 
vibrato without you needing to program or set anything up 
on LFO?1. It also means you only have to set a value in the 
depth field of the LFO1 page to have a constant vibrato. 


NOTE: If you wish to use LFO1 for some other modulation application such as filter 


Sweeps, panning, etc., you will need to turn this value to 00 otherwise pitch will also 
be modulated unless, of course, that's what you want. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


112 EDIT PROGRAM 





Env2 > pitch 


pitchbend 


Nodwheel 


Pressure 


External 


Velocity 


key 


Lfo2 


Env 


! Modwheel 


Version 1.0 10/92 


It is not possible to route any other controllers in this field. 


This is a freely assignable modulation input and any source 
may be selected here. ENV2 is selected as the default again 
as means of ensuring compatibility between the older 
samplers and the S2800. Feel free to route anything you like 
to this field. Some suggestions are: 


Although there is a global pitchbend function in the 
modulation pages, you might like to use this to individually 
bend keygroups separately. The values for pitchbend range 
are: 


+04 1 semitone +09 1 tone 

+13 minor 3rd +17 major 3rd 
+21 fourth +26 6 semitones 
+30 _~— fifth +34 8 semitones 
+38 9 semitones +42 10 semitones 
+46 11 semitones +50 1 octave 


Be sure to turn the pitchbend parameters to 0 in the 
modulation pages unless you wish to add the above values 
to the pitchbend set there. 


Use this instead of pitchbend. The values for pitchbend are 
the same as above. Be sure to turn modulation to +00 in the 
LFO1 > pitch: field above unless you wish the bent note 
to also have vibrato. 


Use this instead of either of the above. The same values 
apply 


Use this instead of the above when using the footpedal or 
breath control possibilities for pitchbend. 


Use this so that differing velocities will affect pitch. This may 
be useful on some percussive sounds which have a different 
pitch for each note - for example, an African talking drum or 
pedal tympani. 


Although this may appear pointless as the keyboard is also 
routed, by setting a negative value here you may set up 
microtonal scales. By setting a positive value you may extend 
the usual keybaord tuning. 


Add this to LFO1 for a more varied vibrato with ensemble 
sounds. Alternatively, setting LFO and LFO2 according, you 
may create some odd special effects. LFO2 could also be set 
to provide a square wave octave jump whilst LFO1 provides 
vibrato as normal. Many possibilities exist. 


Use this to create pitch sweeps that vary according to the 
sounds overall level. 


Use this and the other "!" controllers to affect pitch at the 
point of note-on. 


EDIT PROGRAM 113 





Velocity>loudness: This is another freely assignable modulation field that affects 
individual keygroups' loudness and velocity > 
loudness has been ‘inherited’ from the S1000 and $1100 
to ensure compatibility of sound disks. You may of course, 
assign anything you want here. Some ideas are LFQO1 or 
LFO2 for tremolo effects (try layering keygroups and setting 
One positive and the other negative to create undulating 
crossfades between two samples). Any of the MIDI 
controllers such as modwheel, pressure, bend, etc., may also 
be used to control loudness. 





NOTE: The LOUDNESS modulation here is different from that we saw earlier in the 
OUT page. The OUT page is master control for the level of the whole program - this 
parameter in this page is applicable to individual ke 






CONCLUSION 


As you can see, setting up programs is not radically different from setting up sounds 
on a synthesizer except that the assignable modulation parameters make it much more 
versatile. The same principles of envelope shape, LFO, etc., apply to both. The main 
difference is that you start with your own samples rather than preset waveforms thus 
giving you an almost infinite flexibility in the sounds you can create. 


lf you are already familiar with the S2800's predecessors, we hope you like the 
refinements that have gone into the S2800's EDIT PROGRAM functions, refinements 
we have been able to include thanks to the on-going feedback we have received from 
Our customers. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


114 MIDI 





MIDI 


When you first press the MIDI mode key, the BASIC MIDI CHANNEL CONTROL 
page is entered. This shows a number of parameters which affect the MIDI response 


of the whole instrument. 


EMI MIC 


CHANNEL CONTROL 


program select: BRI 


global OMNIS ON 


external controller: BREATH 


CHAN tapGRe teak: Epes 4 


The parameters are as follows: 


program select: 


global OMNI: 


external controller: 





This allows you to enable or disable Program Change 
commands. The choices are OFF, 1 to 16 and OMNI. 
When. OFF is selected, then program change 
commands will be ignored. Selecting a number 
between 1 and 16 switches program change enable on 
and sets the MIDI channel you wish to use for 
program change. Selecting OMNI will cause program 
change commands received on any MIDI channel to 
select programs. This parameter defaults to OMNI so 
MIDI program change commands wiil be accepted on 
all MIDI channels. 


This allows you to switch OMNI reception of MIDI 
channels (i.e. reception of MIDI on ALL channels) on 
or off. This affects the whole unit and also overrides 
the setting in program select enable. For 
convenience, you may prefer to have this switch 
OMNI to ON so that you don't have to worry about 
which MIDI channel to use but, especially when 
sequencing multi-timbrally, you will need to turn OMNI 
to OFF. 


This allows you to select the external MIDI source used 
in the PROGRAM ASSIGNABLE MODULATION 
system used in programs. Whatever you select here 
becomes one of the choices you can make when 
assigning modulation sources in a program. 


Normally, there is little to do in this screen as all the defaults have been sensibly 


chosen and are shown above. 


You will note that these parameters are saved to disk 


whenever you perform a VOLUME save. They are not saved when performing any 


other type of save. 


MIDI FILTER 


Pressing the key (F2) will display this screen: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


MIDI 115 





This page allows you to filter out specific MIDI information. When you enter this page, 
the cursor will be at the top left of a grid of '+' signs, in a long rectangular box. You 
can use the cursor keys to move to any point on the screen. 


In this grid, the columns represent MIDI channels (1-16), and the rows represent 
MIDI information which the S2800 will accept or filter. The first row, 'ON', affects 
the S2800’s receive capabilities for all information on that channel, the next, 
‘WHLS', refers to the pitch and modulation wheels, the third line, ‘PRES', refers to 
aftertouch, and the last line, 'LOUD', refers to an external MIDI volume control 
(controller 7). The last column in each row, 'all', will affect the appropriate 
information for all MIDi channels. The '+' signs mean that the S2800 accepts this 
information and '-' means that this information is filtered out. 


If you turn the DATA control counter-clockwise, the '+' which the cursor covers will 
change toa '-'. If you make this change in the ON row, all '+' signs in the same 
column below will change to a '-' and you will see a column of '-'. If you make this 
change in the ‘all’ column on the right, the parameter for all MIDI channels will be 
changed and you will see a row of '-'. The top right corner of the display 
(ON/all) is a special case - all parameters will be changed which may be useful for 
restting the whole screen. 


By using this filter, you can control the response of the S2800 to MIDI events. By 
filtering out aftertouch on a percussion program where it is not needed, for instance, 
yOu Can improve the response of the S2800 when a lot of MIDI data is received. 

PPM PAGE - MONITORING MIDI 


Pressing the GE key (F3) will display this screen: 


MICI MITE FFM OCISFLAY 


channel?— 12345678910 il 121311516 
Dea aid PPMs CORN AGATE) SR EDP E 





This page has no parameters. Instead, it provides a real-time display of all Note On 
information received on the 16 MIDI channels. The higher the bar on the display, the 
greater the velocity of the received note. This page is called 'PPMs' because it 
simulates the behaviour of audio bar-graph Peak Program Meters. 


Under normal circumstances when playing the S2800 from a MIDI keyboard, you will 
receive a display such as is shown above with the bar graph showing incoming MIDI 
on the selected channel but, when sequencing multi-timbrally on several channels, you 
will See a display such as: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


116 MIDI 












MICI MITE FRM CISFLHY 


channel?— 1234567891011 213 LISI 
PPMs GSD LG) Gee BEE 





This is a very useful page that allows you to track down any problems you may be 
experiencing when sequencing. For example, if a part isn't sounding, you can check if 
the S2800 is receiving MIDI on its channel. If it is, then it may be some other problem 
such as wrong output assignment, channel fader on the mixer not open, the sound 
hasn't loaded, etc.. 


MIDI RECEIVE PAGE - ANALYSING MIDI 


Another MIDI receive monitor is available in the page. Here, you can monitor 
other types of MIDI information received by the S2800. 








MICI] FECEINE Monitor CHAN: Dg 
dot 
means 
running 
status 











latest > 
HW HANEFILT RCVE Li] Bea 






Again, this is especially useful if you are faultfinding on your MIDI system and you’re 
convinced that you’re transmitting note information on a certain channel, but the 
$2800 isn’t responding. Information from the MIDI IN is displayed, and a channel 
filter may be set at the top of the screen (OMNI or 1 to 16). 


When idle (i.e. not receiving MIDI), the screen shown above is displayed - when 
receiving MIDI, something like the following is shown: 









MICI FECEIVE Moni Tor 








t F.4 ON VEL= 80 1 dot 
ft A_4 ON UVEL=65 1 means 
# C_5 ON VEL=110 1 running 
#@ C_5S OFF VEL= 47 1 status 






latest >F_4 OFF VEL= 45 1 
DET) Gad GE’ RCVE BST) GR Ba 






Here you will see a constantly changing display as notes are received. If any 
performance controls are used such as mod wheel or pressure, these too will be 
shown. 


lf the information is not displayed on this monitor, the information is not reaching the 
$2800. Check your connections or the output channel of the transmitting equipment. 
lf the information appears to be correct, but no sound or unexpected sounds are 
being produced, then the fault may lie in the MIDI setting of the program(s). You may 
discover that the piano track of the sequencer is playing the drum samples, for 
example. 

You may select to view particular channels using the CHAN: field. This defaults to 0M 
(short for OMNI so you can view all channels but you may select individual channels 1- 
16 if you only wish to monitor a specific channel. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


MIDI 117 





TRANSMIT TEST PAGE - SETTING THE ENT/PLAY KEY 


MIDI 


Pressing the soft key (F5) will display this screen. 








channel: 9 
note: C_3 
velocity: 127 

rSEND. 
RIT) id Ge (eS TRAN GR CON J OFF] 


In the TRANS page, you can produce a test transmission of a MIDI note, and set the 
channel, key and velocity of the note to be transmitted, using the and 

keys (F7 and F8). This key value and velocity will also be used by the key when 
testing samples and programs using the ENT/PLAY key. 





DATA DUMPS 


Samples can be transferred between the S2800 and other samplers via MIDI and this 
is done in the EXCL page: 


RP Ga) Ge ee channel: 1 ¢trans & rec) 
type of transmission: ALL PROGRAMS 
sample protocol: STANDARD 


single program: STRINGS 1 
single sample: STRING C4 
sample number override: 2 


RIT Bid Ge Ges EXCL Bed (SEND! 





To perform a MIDI data dump, you must make a MIDI loop (MIDI OUT of the S2800 
connected to MIDI IN of the other sampler, and vice versa). This is necessary 
because of the way in which MIDI sample dumps are performed (in computer terms, a 
handshake protocol with error detection/correction). 


Though the S2800 is a 16-bit sampler, it can accept samples from other samplers, 
including those from other manufacturers which use a lower bit resolution. If 
transmitting to another sampler which uses fewer bits, the S2800 simply truncates 
the low bits during the transfer. Instead of another sampler, samples can be 
transmitted to and accepted from other devices (Such as computers) which are 
capable of storing and/or editing sample data with the appropriate sample editing 
software. However, in this section we will always refer to the other device as a 
‘sampler’. The fields are as follows: 


channel: This does not refer to a MIDI channel, but a ‘logical 
channel’ used in System Exclusive protocol. Both 
samplers must be set to the same channel for transfer 
to take place. 


type of transmission: This parameter refers to what will actually be 
transmitted over MIDI. This can be ALL PROGRANS, 
ALL SAMPLES, SINGLE PROGRAM, SINGLE 
SAMPLE, and DRUM SETTINGS. The meanings of 
these values should be self-explanatory. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


118 MIDI 





sample protocol: Two protocols for sample transfer are available. 
STANDARD conforms to the M!DI sample dump 
standard and will dump only samples across and 
$3000, which is a superset of the MIDI sample dump 
standard which will dump everything including loop 
and other data. Use the S3000 setting only if you are 
transferring data between two S2800-compatible 
machines. 


single program: lf you have selected SINGLE PROGRAM 
transmission, this parameter allows you to specify the 
program which will be transmitted. 


single sample: lf you have selected SINGLE SAMPLE transmission, 
this parameter allows you to specify the sample which 
will be transmitted. 


sample number override: You Can override the default sample number (based on 
the order in which samples appear in the S2800’s 
memory) with this parameter. 


PERFORMING A MIDI DATA DUMP 


MIDI 


When all the parameters are set up, press the key to initiate transmission. Once 
the handshake protocol has been successfully initiated between the two devices, data 
transfer will take place. A new soft key, ABORT, will appear. Press this if you want 
to terminate the transmission prematurely. 


There is no receive key on the S2800 as reception of bulk data will automatically take 
place once a remote device initiates the dump protocol. 


NOTE: It is quite likely (if not certain) that sample editors will not work if you use the 
S2800 protocol because the editor will not have the ability to recognise the new file 
header information present because of the new features in the S2800. No doubt, 
manufacturers of these editors will soon upgrade their software to overcome this. In 
the meantime, you should use the standard MIDI sample dump protocol to exchange 
sounds between your editor and the S2800. 


VIA SCSI 


The final soft key in this mode, F7, calls up the SCSI screen: 


SCSI COMMUNICATION 
IDI via SCSI: OFF 
local SCSI ID: 6 
remote SCSI ID: 6 


FILT SCSI 





This only applies if you have a S2800 fitted with the SCSI interface board (IB-301S). 
On this page you can enable or disable MIDI bulk data transmission along a SCSI 
buss, rather than the MIDI connections, and set the SCSI IDs for both the S2800 
and the other SCSI device. The other SCSI device can be another of the S2800 
series Or a personal computer (equipped with the appropriate software). Values for 
SCSI device IDs can be from 0 to 7 and the two devices must have different SCSI 
numbers, otherwise there will be a conflict on the SCSI buss as two devices try to 


Version 1.0 10/92 


MIDI 119 





share the same ID. SCSI transmission of MIDI is much faster than normal MIDI data 
dumps which can take an awful long time!! 


The soft key allows you to reset the SCSI of your S2800 should some problem 
occur. When the SCSI buss gets busy as is the case when using a hard disk or other 
such SCSi device and especially when several SCSI devices are sharing the same 
buss, you can occasionally get SCSI errors. This is not a fault of the S2800 but will 
happen on any busy SCSI system. If you get this problem, use this key to reset the 
buss. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


120 DISK MODE 





DISK MODE 


This mode allows you to perform a number of disk-related operations, over and above 
those which you can perform from the SELECT PROG mode. Pressing the DISK 
mode key will display a screen something like the following: 









a ae eo es: vol: NOT NAMED 
free memory: 100% STRINGS 1 P OZ 
free P/vK/S 1012 STRINGS 2 P OZ 
type of load:- SLOW STRINGS P O% 
ENTIRE VOLUME STRING C2 S 24 
progs: 3 samps: 7 {STRING C3 S 6% 
LOAD E¥WS tsi Ce (LCL RC GO 








LOADING FROM DISK 


The S2800 allows you to load samples, programs, programs together with their 
associated samples, drum settings, Qlists, FX files and operating systems from disk. 
This flexibility helps you pick and choose the sounds you need for a session or 
performance with the minimum of trouble. 


After inserting a disk with data on it, press the LOAD key. If you haven't inserted a 
disk when you go to the disk page or press load, you will receive this message: 


| NO DISK ! | 


If the disk is unformatted (or has become seriously damaged in some way) the S2800 
will tell you: 


| UNREADABLE FORMAT ! or unformatted? | 


In this case, you will need to format the disk (see below). 





A floppy disk can only contain one volume, and may be formatted as high or DD. 
When you insert a new disk into the drive, if that disk's density (high or low - HD or 
DD) is different from the density of the last disk inserted, the S2800 will try an 
alternative density. The density of the disk currently inserted will be displayed as 
FLOPPYH or FLOPPYL at the top of the screen. 





IMPORTANT NOTE: On the S1000 and S1100, it is possible to format DD disks 
to a high density format. This is not possible on the S2800. Furthermore, the S2800 
cannot read DD disks that have been formatted on an S1000/1100 to a high densit 
format. You will need to first load these sounds into an S1000/1100, resave them 
onto high density disks (formatted to high density, of course) before they can be 
used in the S2800. High density disks have a hole on the right hand side which is 
used by the disk drive to detect that it is a high density disk. If the S2800 does no 
‘see’ this hole, it assumes it is a DD disk and so searches for a DD format. If it doesn 
find it (i.e. because the disk is high density format), it cannot read it. 














lf you have a hard disk fitted, you can select HARD at the top of the screen. You will 
receive a screen display such as: 


Version 1.0 10/92 


DISK MODE 121 












LOMO FROM CI=b & vol: NOT NAMED 
free memory: 100% STRINGS 1 P OZ 
free P/K/S 1012 STRINGS 2 P OZ 
type of load:- SLOW STRINGS P OZ 
ENTIRE VOLUME STRING C2 S 5% 
progs: 3 samps: 7 |STRING C3 S 6% 


LOAD EYWa Gai aan! (CLRICGO 4] 







This shows we have selected the hard disk and have selected partition A. 


Hard disks can be divided into partitions (see the section on formatting for full details 
of how partitions are arranged) and the partition letter can be selected following the 
selection of HARD. Note that there will be a slight delay after choosing a partition 
while the partition is selected and read by the S2800. One partition on a hard disk 
can contain up to 128 volumes and each volume can contain up to 512 ‘items’ - that is, 
combinations of programs, samples, effects files, Qlists, etc., and you can select the 
volume from which you want to load data in the next parameter field - vol:. 


A list of all files (programs, samples and drum settings) will be displayed on the right 
side of the page. Programs have a 'P' beside their name, samples have an 'S', and 
drum input settings have a 'D'. Effects files have an 'X' beside them and Qlists 
have a 'Q'. Floppy disks or hard disk volumes that contain S1000 or $1100 samples 
will have a '1' after these letters to signify they are from this series of sampler. They 
may be freely loaded into the S2800 without any problems. 


Beside the type of file on the disk, there is also a percentage number along side it, 
which gives the amount of space that this file will take when loaded into memory. 
Programs, Qlists and effects files will usually show 0%. 


The left hand side of the display shows you how many programs, keygroups and 
samples are free in memory (you may have a total of 1,022 'items') and at the bottom 
it displays how many programs and samples are currently in memory. 


lf you cannot see the file you want to load, move the cursor to the list of files and 
scroll up and down to display ail the files on the disk. If the file you want is not on the 
disk, insert another disk and press LOAD to re-read the disk. If you have a hard disk 
fitted, then you can choose another volume to read. When you know that you have 
the right disk or volume, you can proceed. 


The parameter under the type of load:- message can take a number of values. 
These are described below. When you have selected the appropriate value, you can 
press LOLR) or LGO_) (CCLRI (CLEAR) will delete all programs and samples from 
memory, and then load the chosen file(s) from disk. You will receive this prompt to 
check you want to clear the memory: 


STRING C3 S__ 6% 
CLEAR MEM THEN LOAD ?? confirm NO YES 


and you should make the appropriate response. 


Pressing LGO_] will try to load the chosen file(s) into memory without deleting 
anything first. As the disk is being loaded you will receive something like the following 
display to keep you aware of progress: 


STRING C3 S 6% 
loading sample:— STRING C2 


Version 1.0 10/92 


122 DISK MODE 


NOTE: On hard disks, the loading may be so fast that you barely see the names 
flashing on the screen. 


It is possible that the chosen file(s) will occupy more memory space than is actually 
available, in which case the loading process will be halted and you will receive this 
prompt: 





STRING C3 S 64% 
ll! Insufficient waveform memory!! 


Any files which have been completely loaded into memory prior to the prompt will 
remain in memory, however. 


Even if a file exists in memory with the same name as a file on disk, the disk file will 
still be loaded and the file in memory will be overwritten. 


The type of loads you can perform are extremely flexible and comprise: 


ENTIRE VOLUME This will load the entire contents of the disk (and other disks 
of the same volume when using floppy disks) into the 
memory (programs, samples, drum settings, effects, Qlists 
and operating system). 


ALL PROGS+SANPLES As the name suggests, all programs and samples on the disk 
will be loaded into memory. Any other files will not be loaded 
(drum settings, effects files, Qlists, operating system, etc). 


ALLPROGRANS ONLY Only programs (those files marked with a 'P' in the display) 
will be loaded. 


ALL SAMPLES All samples (files marked with an 'S' in the display) will be 
loaded. 


CURSORPROG+SANPS After selecting this parameter, move the cursor to a program 
file, and press or . The selected program will be 
loaded, and then the S2800 will examine the program to see 
what samples are used by the program. These samples will 
then automatically be loaded. 


CURSOR ITEN ONLY After selecting this parameter, move the cursor to any file 
(program, sample, effects files, Qlists or drum settings), and 
press LOLRJ or LGO_). The highlighted file will then be loaded 
into memory. 

OPERATING SYSTEM If the disk contains an operating system, you can load the 
system from disk. 


LOADING $900/S950 SAMPLES AND PROGRAMS 


No special command is provided for S900 samples. Inserting an S900 disk will give 
you this display: 


| S900 DISK ! use only for reading | 


Simply select the appropriate load type and proceed as above. The S2800 display will 
inform you when a sample for the S900 is being read, and after each S900 sample has 
been successfully read, an additional message, ‘unscrambling S900 sample’ 
will appear, as the S2800 converts S900 to S2800 format (12-bit to 16-bit). 


Version 1.0 10/92 


DISK MODE 123 





AUTO LOADING FROM DISK 


If you turn on the S2800 with a disk in the drive, the contents of the disk will be 
loaded into memory. If the disk contains a copy of the operating system and this 
operating system is the same or a higher version number than the ROM version, this 
will be loaded. 


lf an internal hard disk is fitted and set to SCSI ID 5 and the operating system is on 
the first volume, the operating system will be automatically loaded from this if it is the 
same or a higher version than the ROM version and no floppy disk is in the drive at 
power-on. 


It is a good idea for you to make a copy of any Operating System disks for your 
$2800 and always turn on the S2800 with the latest version inserted in the drive (see 
below for details on saving operating system to disk). 


SAVING TO DISK 


REMEMBER! When you turn off the $2800, all samples, programs and 
drum settings are lost. Save your work to disk if you want to keep it 
for another session. 


By pressing the key from the main DISK page, you can save your edited 
programs, samples and other files to disk. Make sure that you have enough 
unprotected formatted disks available or enough room on your hard disk before you 
Save. 


The process of saving to disk is much the same as loading from disk. There are two 
major differences, however: 


1) Disk space is measured in blocks - not percentage free space. One formatted 
MF2DD disk contains 783 blocks, and one MF2HD disk contains 1583 blocks. 


2) The unexpanded S2800 is capable of holding more data than will fit onto a single 
MF2DD or MF2HD disk. If you try to save an entire volume with many programs and 
samples, you will have to use more than one disk. 


NOTE: You cannot save continuous samples across more than one floppy disk. For 
example, if you have a 24 second sample and try to save it, it cannot store part o 


that sample on one disk and part on another. If you are using long samples like this, 
we recommend you invest in a hard disk. 





When you first press EW, all programs, samples and drum settings in memory are 
displayed on screen, together with the amount of space in blocks that they will take 
up on disk. 






> [aeees! Vol: NOT NAMED 








free blocks: 1399 STRINGS 1 P 1 
free entries: 115 STRINGS 2 P 1 
type of saver SLOW STRINGS P 1 

ENTIRE VOLUME STRING C2 S 345 
progs: 3 samps: 7 |STRING C3 S 365 






SAVE Hail ae WIPE) LGO_] 





Select the option to save: ENTIRE VOLUME, ALL PROGS+SAMPLES, ALL 
PROGRAMS ONLY, ALL SAMPLES, CURSOR PROG+SAMPS, CURSOR ITEM 
ONLY or OPERATING SYSTEM in the same way as for loading. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


124 


DISK MODE 





If you choose one of the CURSOR items, move the cursor to the sample or program 
in memory that you want to save. Saving CURSOR PROG+SAMPS will automatically 
save any samples associated with the highlighted program. If the samples already 
exist on disk with the same name, they will be overwritten. Be careful if you are using 
samples which have been slightly modified between programs; give them different 
names to avoid overwriting what may represent hours of work unless, of course, you 
specifically want to. 


lf you want to check the files already on disk, you can press to view files on 
disk and then return to 


When you have made your selection press WIPE] or LGO_] to save your work. [WIPE 
will erase all data already on the disk, and save the selected file(s), and LGQ_J will 
simply save the files in addition to any already on disk. If you are saving to floppy 
disk, and there are more files to be saved than will fit on a single disk, you will be 
prompted to insert a new disk. 


NOTE: It goes without saying that write protect must be off in order to save to a 
floppy disk! 


NOTES ON SAVING THE OPERATING SYSTEM TO DISK. 





The S2800 contains its operating system on ROM. However, it is possible to upgrade 
software via floppy disk. 






There are, however, benefits to loading the operating system from floppy in that you 
are able to save your own system defaults which will override those set at the factory. 
For example, if you have a particular way of recording and sampling, you can save all 
the record parameters such as default sampling time, start method, etc.. You may also 
save such things as digital input settings and hard disk SCSI ID's and sector size. 
When you load from floppy, these will be loaded. 









You may even Save your own test program by setting the parameters as you think fit 
and saving that as an ordinary program to the operating system disk. This too will be 
loaded on power up giving you maybe a more Suitable template to work from. 






Saving to hard disk follows the same procedure as saving to disk. Note that if the 
hard disk is divided into partitions, you can load data from one partition, select 
another partition on the SAVE page, and save it into the newly-selected partition. It 
is not possible to transfer data directly between partitions - it must be done by 
loading it into memory and saving it back elsewhere on the disk. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


DISK MODE 125 





RENAMING FILES 


In the rename page, you can rename individual files on disk, or rename a volume on 
disk (a floppy disk can contain only one volume, but a hard disk can contain many 
volumes). If you have an internal hard disk fitted and/or and external drive attached, 
select the partition, and the volume to be renamed, or the volume containing the 
file(s) to be renamed, otherwise, if you're using floppy, insert the disk which contains 
data to be renamed. Press the key to enter a new name. You will receive this 
screen display: 





: vol: NOT NAMED 
new name:— STRINGS 1 
NEW NAME STRINGS 2 
Vol load number: SLOW STRINGS 
vol load enable:OFF |STRING C2 
rename | or —_ pdt od 


REN 1 Oo FILE 








Ow vv VU 
NUODOS 
NNNNN 






or this if you are using a hard disk: 





aS: CEE vol: VOLUME 021 
new name:— STRINGS 1 P Q% 
NEW NAME STRINGS 2 P OZ 
Vol load number:0OFF |SLOW STRINGS P QZ 
Vol load enable:OFF |STRING C2 S 5% 
rename VOL or ro dicted head S 6% 


Td EWS REN 1 CUOL] (EXLE) 








To enter the name, press the NAME key and type in a suitable name of up to 12 
characters. You may enter numbers from the numeric keypad by pressing NAME again 
and you may toggle between the numeric keypad's letters or numbers simply by 
pressing the NAME key. You will get a screen display something like this: 





AES: GMa) vol: NOT NAMED 






new name:— STRINGS 1 P Q% 
MEW NAME] STRINGS 2 P 0O% 
Vol load number: SLOW STRINGS P QZ 






Vol load enable:OFF |STRING C2 S S24 
rename VOL or FILE |STRING C3 S 62% 
LETTERS .. CNAME for numbers ENT to exit) 







When you have entered the new name, press ENT and then press to rename 
the hard disk volume or floppy disk or highlight a file with the CURSOR keys and 
press EILE] to rename the highlighted file. 


With a hard disk fitted, MIDI Program Change messages may be used to load 
volumes. Use the vol load number: parameter on this page to assign a number 
from 1 to 128 for the current volume. Once set, you may turn this on and off freely in 
the vol load enable: field. On receipt of a Program Change message, the 
$2800 will scan all the hard disk volumes for a number set in this page which 
corresponds to the Program Change number in the MIDI message. The volume will 
then be loaded (the currently-selected program number will change to 1 and program 
number 1 of the volume which has just been loaded will be selected). 





Version 1.0 10/92 


126 DISK MODE 





DELETING ITEMS FROM DISK 


Pressing the key displays this screen: 





disk : vol: NOT NAMED 
free blocks: 1399 STRINGS 1 P O% 
tupe of delete: STRINGS 2 P O% 
CURSOR ITEM ONLY |SLOW STRINGS P 0x 

STRINGS S 5% 

STRING C3 S 6% 
TP ESS GS DEL Eee ae CGO J 













You can delete a file (or files) from a floppy disk or hard disk. If you have a hard disk 
fitted, select the volume using the parameter field on the first line. There are a number 
of options that you can pick to determine what file(s) will be deleted. 


CURSOR ITEM ONLY As its name suggests, deletes only that file which is 
highlighted by the cursor. 


ALL PROGRANS ONLY This deletes all programs, but not their associated samples. 
ALL SANPLES This deletes all samples on the current volume. 


ENTIRE VOLUME This is the most drastic, erasing all data on the volume. 


OPERATING SYSTEM This removes the operating system from the volume. 





HARD DISK CONTROL 


SCSI (Small Computer Serial Interface) has become very popular as a means of 
interfacing devices and by fitting the S2800 with the IB-301S SCSI Interface board, 
you may use a wide range of hard disks as a storage device for your sound library. 
Hard disks offer more in the way of size and also speed. More recently, the removable 
Cartridge types of storage devices have become increasingly popular. The problem 
with fixed drives is that when they fill up you either have to delete files (or back them 
up to floppy or DAT) or you need to buy another drive. With the removable types, you 
simply insert another cartridge. The problem with these, however, is that, whilst they 
are fine in daily use with a word processor, loading huge volumes of sound data into 
the S2800 all day in a busy studio can give rise to unreliability. 


Perhaps the most elegant solution at the time of writing is the Sony Magneto Optical 
(MO) drive, especially the larger 650MByte type. This has all the benefits of a fixed 
hard drive in that storage capacity is very large and the medium is also removable. 
They also seem to be extremely reliable. Although they can be expensive, they do 
come highly recommended. 


The S2800 is compatible with all of these (*) including the two formats of MO disk - 
the 1kB/sector and 512B/sector. 





* NOTE: New drives are appearing all the time and it is impossible for us to check 
every drive. Please be sure to really check with your dealer and/or Akai distributor tha 
the drive you intend to purchase is able to work successfully with your S2800. Whils 
every effort is made to ensure compatibility between drives, some devices to no 
adhere exactly to the SCSI protocol and can cause problems. Akai cannot accep 
responsibility for lost data 








Version 1.0 10/92 


DISK MODE 127 





CONNECTING AN EXTERNAL HARD DISK DRIVE 


Assuming the IB-301S SCSI interface is fitted in the S2800, connection is as follows: 





1B-301S SCSI INTERFACE HARD DISK DRIVE To other SCSI devices 
(or CD ROM, etc.) 


Take a standard 50 pin SCSI cable and connect it to the IB-301S connection and 
then to the SCSI connection on the hard disk drive. Most drives have two SCSI 
connections and the other can be used as a '‘thru' to other SCSI devices such as CD 
ROM or another hard disk drive, etc.. 


NOTES ON USING HARD DISK DRIVES 
¢ SCSI CABLES 


Always high quality SCSI cables. Using low quality ones will give rise to data errors. 
The flat ribbon cables are really intended only for use inside devices and have 
insuffient screening which may Cause data noises to appear in your audio signal path 
when any disk activity is going on, especially if your audio connections run parallel with 
the SCSI lead. However, if this is not a problem for you (and in a studio it may not 
be), these cables are usually very good. In a live situation, however, they are probably 
not ideal. 


¢ TERMINATION 


A chain of SCSI devices must be terminated at either end and terminating resistors 
are fitted to most SCSI devices when you buy them. The S2800 is terminated on the 
IB-301S SCSI interface board. It is most likely that the S2800 will be at one end o 
the chain and so must be left terminated. Any disks in between the S2800 and the 
last SCSI device in the chain must be unterminated (this can be done by physically 
removing the resistors or sometimes via a DIP switch on the back of the unit). The 
last device must be terminated. Incorrect termination may give rise to data errors so 
please ensure it is done correctly. If you have any doubts, please contact your deale 
who will be able to help. 





Your hard disk is controlled from the EIGEIM page of the DISK mode. When EIG3H is 
pressed, the following screen display is seen: 


HHFC OI=) CONTROL 









SCSI drive ID: 5 
local SCSI ID: 6 
SCSI drive sector size: 512b 

Press PARK to set heads to safe position 


XT EWS Se EES HSK GH Sres] (PARK) 








The parameters on this page are used to set SCSI ID's. The most important 
parameters you need to know about are SCSI drive ID: and SCSI drive 
sector size:. 


SCSI allows up to 8 devices to be on the buss and these each have a unique number 0 


- 7 (it's similar to the concept of MIDI channels). In order for one SCSI device to ‘talk’ 
to a hard drive, their SCSI ID's must match. The SCSI drive ID: field sets the 


Version 1.0 10/92 


128 DISK MODE 





SCSI ID for the IB-301S interface. The default setting in the SCSI drive ID: 
field is 5 - this is the number given to an internal hard disk if one is fitted. If you use 
an external drive, this parameter must be set to match that of the drive. For example, 
if your external drive is 1, this parameter must be set to 1. You may, if you wish, have 
several drives connected and each of these must have different SCSI ID's. Each one 
can be selected by changing the ID number in the SCSI drive ID: field. 


The SCSI drive sector size: field allows you to switch between the different 
MO formats of disk. There are two - 512Bytes per sector and 1kByte per sector. Both 
offer the same storage, they just have different sector sizes. The S2800 can use both 
and this is selected in this field. The default is 512b. 


The other field, local SCSI ID: , sets the S2800's SCSI ID (as distinct from the 
IB301's ID) and is used when communicating between samplers or computer editors 
over SCSI. 





NOTE: If your external drive's ID is something other than 5 and uses a 
IkBytes/sector disk, you may set the appropriate settings here and, by saving the 
operating system to floppy disk and powering up with it in the drive, the S2800 will 
default to the SCS/ ID and sector size of your drive. 






[PARK] is a very important operation if you have a hard disk fitted and should be 
performed every time you end a session with a S2800 with a hard disk fitted. If you 
do not have a hard disk fitted, this does not apply to you. The PARK procedure 
makes the hard disk safe for transportation. If you neglect to do this, you stand the 
chance of losing the data on the hard disk and the hard disk itself if the S2800 is 
roughly handled. To park the heads, press PARK). If, for some reason, the heads on 
the hard disk are not parked properly, a message will tell you to try again. If you keep 
retrying and this message continues to appear, contact your AKAI dealer. Head 
parking is not a luxury, it is a necessity if you intend moving your S2800. 


FORMATTING DISKS 


Before you can use a disk, it must be formatted. MF2DD disks will automatically be 
formatted as low-density, and MF2HD disks will be formatted as high-density. As 
explained earlier in this manual, these different types of disk cannot be formatted in 
the other way as they could on the S1000 and $1100. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


DISK MODE 129 





FORMATTING A FLOPPY DISK 


To format a floppy disk, insert the disk in the drive, and press GEG. You will see this 
screen display: 





FORMAT FLOFFY OF HHFD (I=) i 
BLOCKS HARD PARTITIONS 

track: good: size: 60 Mb 

side: bad: 















FORMat or ARRange floppy disk:-> rSTART. 
REN FORM [EORM LARR J 





Select FLOPPY at the top of the screen if it isn't already selected and press EQORM). 


You will see: 
| formatting disk HIGH DENSITY... | 


or 


| formatting disk LOW DENSITY... | 


depending on the type of disk you are using. The process will take about a minute and 
the track and side number of the disk will be displayed as the operation proceeds. 
When the operation is complete you should receive the following display: 


FORMAT FLOP OF HARE CIS 
BLOCKS HARD PARTITIONS 
track: 80 good: 1583 $size: 60 Mb 
side: 2 bad: 0) 
DISK IS READY FOR USE 
FORMat or ARRange floppy disk:-> rSTART. 


Gd EES GS ES Ge FORM [ORM CARR] 








This indicates that the disk has formatted correctly and is safe to use. If you get an 
indication that there are bad blocks, the disk may be unreliable. The S2800 will inform 
you of this. If you do receive such a message, you may like to try again but it usually 
means that the disk has become seriously damaged in some way. This is unlikely to 
happen on brand new disks but may happen on floppy disks that are being re-used, 
especially if they have been used before on another system. 


Formatting a disk will permanently remove all data previously recorded 
on it. Only format new disks or ones which contain data that you are 
Sure you don’t need any more. 


lf you have a hard disk connected to the S2800 as well, be especially 
careful to select FLOPPY!! 





The LARR] key is used as a quick format for changing the directory size of disks 
formatted on an S1000 or S1100 (please see below - NOTES ON USING $1000 
AND $1100 SOUND LIBRARY). 


Usually, you must use EQRM to format a new disk for use in the S2800. Trying LARR) 
on an unformatted disk will display the prompt: 


| cant gquick-format this disk ! 


You should use EQRM. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


130 DISK MODE 





FORMATTING A HARD DISK 


Hard disks can and should also be formatted before use. The maximum size of hard 
disk which can be formatted and used with the S2800 is 510Mbytes. If any larger 
hard disk is attached to the S2800, data above this size will not be recognized or 
used. Switching to HARD-: will display this screen: 








FORMAT FLOFF YS OF HARE: Cl =) BB HART: | 

BLOCKS HARD PARTITIONS 
part. : good: $size: 60 Mb 
size: bad: 











FORMat or ARRange hard disk:-> rSTART1 
EXWa Gisi8 FORM [EORM] CARR J 





For convenience, large hard disks are split into partitions, which are named A, B, C, 
etc (if you are used to MS-DOS systems, these partitions are analogous to ‘logical 
drives’ on a hard disk). All partitions must be the same size, which you can select with 
the HARD PARTITIONS size: parameter to be variable between 1 and 
60Mbytes. The last partition on a hard disk takes up all the remaining space on the 
disk (i.e. on a 120Mbyte disk divided into 50Mb partitions, A and B will both be 
50Mbytes, and C will be 20Mbytes). 


To format the hard disk, press either EQRM or LQRRJ depending on the action you 
want to take. You will receive the following safeguard prompt: 


FORMat or ARRange hard disk:->> rSTART. 
DESTROY ALL HARD DISK DATA ?? NO YES 


Answer NO if you have second thoughts, otherwise answer YES. 


Both formatting and arranging will destroy all data 
on the hard disk. 


Arranging is a faster operation than a full format (it simply initializes directories into a 
format suitable for use by the S2800). Make sure that there is no data which is only 
stored on the hard disk which you want to keep. 


Formatting will take a few minutes, followed by the arrange process. Bad blocks will 
be automatically ‘swapped out’ in a verification procedure. You can bypass this 
verification process by pressing SKIP, but it is suggested that you let it run its course 
it will end up safer in the long run. 


lf the drive is not connected or the SCSI ID's don't match, you might receive the 
message when you press EORM or 


| waiting for hard disk ready. . SKIP | 


or it may say: 


| HARD DISK DRIVE NOT READY ! | 


Version 1.0 10/92 


DISK MODE 131 





Please check your SCSI cables and that the drive is switched on (it does happen!). 
Also, please check the SCSI ID settings of both the drive and the IB-301S. You will 
also get this message if a removable type of hard disk is being used and the disk is not 
inserted in the drive regardless of connections and settings. 


NOTES ON USING EXISTING $1000/S1100 SOUND LIBRARY 


To accommodate the need for larger disk directories, the S2800 now allows 512 items 
to be saved on a floppy or hard disk (previously it was 64 for floppy and 128 for hard 
disk). As a result, the whole format of the directories is completely different. 


$1000 and S1100 disks can, of course, be used with no problem (*). The problem 
occurs, however, if you try to save to a disk that was formatted on an S1000 or 
$1100. Because the disk directory has now changed, the S1000/1100 disk has to be 
reformatted. When you perform a save, if you use WIPE) this process is done 
automatically for you. If, however, you use instead of wipe, the S2800 will 


remind you: 
| re-format or arrange before writing ! | 


You may either specifically go through the formatting procedure yourself or you may 
simply press 


The same is true of hard disk volumes. Simply using the LGO_) key when you try to 
save to a hard disk volume that was originally formatted using an S1000 or S1100, 
will cause this message to be displayed: 


| Must kill $1000 volume before writing i | 


This is saying that this volumes directory needs to be re-written in the S2800 format. 
To do this, you should use WIPE) - this will automatically rewrite the directory. After 
this, you may use the volumes as normal. 


WARNING! 


MAKE SURE ALL DATA IS EITHER SAVED ELSEWHERE OR STORED 
IN THE SAMPLER. REWRITING THE DIRECTORY WILL ERASE ALL 
THE HEADERS FOR THE SAMPLES, PROGRAMS, EFFECTS FILES, 
ETC., AND YOU WILL LOSE YOUR DATA. 


WHEN USING A HARD DISK, THE ACTION OF KILLING A VOLUME 
APPLIES ONLY TO THAT VOLUME. THIS IS NOT A FORMATTING 
PROCEDURE. WHEN YOU SEE THE PROMPT, USE WIPE] - DO NOT 
FORMAT YOUR HARD DISK AS THIS WILL ERASE EVERYTHING ON 
iT; 





Version 1.0 10/92 


132 DISK MODE 









(*) IMPORTANT NOTE: On the S1000 and S1100, it is possible to format DD 
disks to a high density format. This is not possible on the S2800. Furthermore, the 
S2800 cannot read DD disks that have been formatted on an S1000/1100 to a high 
density format. You will need to first load these sounds into an S1000/1100, resave 
them onto high density disks (formatted to high density, of course) before they can 
be used in the S2800. High density disks have a hole on the right hand side which is 
used by the disk drive to detect that it is a high density disk. If the S2800 does not 
‘see’ this hole, it assumes it is a DD disk and so searches for a DD format. If it doesn't 
find it (i.e. because the disk is high density format), it cannot read it. 










PARAMETER SETTINGS 


If you are very familiar with your programs or have an S1000/S1100 to directly 
compare with, you will notice that some parameter values are different in the S2800. 
This is not a fault but a ‘fix up’ our software engineers have done so that S1000 or 
$1100 sounds loaded into the S2800 sound the same. 


On the S2800, many of the program parameters (and some EDIT SAMPLE 


parameters) have different ranges and so some offsets are invoked so that, for 
example, LFO speeds are consistent between the two families of samplers. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


TUNE/LEVEL SCREEN _ 133 





TUNE/LEVEL SCREEN 


Pressing the TUNE/LEVEL mode select key gives you this screen display: 


TFHANAFIVAE FINE TUNE 
-/ -4¢ Q +447 -59 fo) 


t t 
SEMI-TONES CENTS 


Master Level: +0dB- -rtone, 





Udec | Linc ] 


TUNING AND TRANSPOSING 


The S2800 can be transposed by up to +9 semitones and fine tuned by up to +50 
cents (one semitone) to enable easy playing in difficult keys and to match tuning with 
other instruments. When you first press the TUNE/LEVEL key, two scales indicate 
the current transposition and tuning. Use the CURSOR < and > keys to transpose 
up or down and the DATA control to provide fine tuning (one click of the knob equals 
one cent). These transposition and tuning settings will be lost when power is turned 
off unless they are saved to disk in a full volume save. 


There are two soft keys LOK_] and LOEF] in this screen display on F7 and F8. These 
will turn an A=440Hz audio signal on and off to the stereo output connectors (and 
the headphones). This may be used as a tuning reference for the sampler (or any 
other instruments you have) or as a test tone for checking levels, etc.. 


SETTING THE S2800'S MASTER OUTPUT LEVEL 


As well as the main volume control, it is also possible to set the master level for the 
$2800 in this page. The primary benefit of this function is to set the output level to 
match different mixers’ headroom. It is possible to boost the sampler's output level 
for a ‘hotter’ output for professional +4dBm desks but for desks that run at -10dBm, 
you may prefer to cut the level back a bit to prevent distortion. In order to optimise 
the S2800's signal to noise ratio, it is recommended you run the outputs as high as 
possible - this, in turn, will require less gain on your mixer input channels which will 
keep noise levels down. The level settings will be lost when power is turned off unless 
they are saved to disk in a full volume save. 


Level is adjusted using the Ldec] Linc_] soft keys - F1 and F2. 


You will note that this control affects not only the stereo outputs but also the 
individual outputs. 


NOTE 1: If the IB-302D AES/EBU digital audio interface is fitted, adjusting the 
master output level will affect the interfaces real time digital outputs as well. 


NOTE 2:All of the tune and level parameters are saved to disk when a full volume 
Save is performed. They are not saved with any other type of save. This is also true o 
loading from disk - a full volume load will load these parameters but any other type o 
load will not. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


134 UTILITY MODE 





UTILITY MODE 


The UTILITY mode is one where several ancillary functions are included. These depend 
on the presence of certain optional pieces of equipment such as the ME35T 
audio/MIDI converter, and IB-302D AES/EBU digital audio interface. On entering this 
mode, you will see this screen: 


LITILITIE= 
The following utilities are available: 
*« MESST Interface 


*x Digital Audio 





No parameters are directly available here - this merely displays the options open to 
you. 


PROGRAMMING THE AKAI ME35T 


Pressing MMM displays the following screen: 


input: 
capture: 
recover: 
on-time: 


U-curve: INi-12345678 





EDIT 


The $2800 is capable of acting as a highly sophisticated percussion sampler using the 
AKAI ME35T audio/MIDI trigger interface unit to produce MIDI trigger signals from a 
variety of sources. Two such units may be connected, and programming of them may 
be carried out from the S2800 rather than on the more limited displays and controls 
of the ME35Ts. For such programming to take place, a ‘MIDI handshake’ must be set 
up, from IN to OUT and OUT to IN. 





°©O0O seoeos sesocooosce ©O0O eeoes soocoocooo 


Fig 1 Fig 2 


When two MES35T units are to be used together to provide 4 drum inputs, they should 
be connected as shown in Fig 2. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


UTILITY MODE 135 





Since this is a manual for the S2800, full details of the operation of the MES35T will 
not be given here. Refer to the ME35T manual for operational details. However, 
note that to set up the MIDI Exclusive channel on the ME35T, the MIDI CHAN and 
MIDI NOTE keys on the ME35T should be pressed simultaneously. The following 
parameters on the ME35T may be set up from the S2800: 


The name of the drum input settings may be altered by pressing NAME, typing in the 
name followed by ENTER. 


The parameters on this page are as follows: 


unit: Either one of two MES35Ts may be selected for parameter 
editing here. 
input: Selecting ALL allows the inputs to be globally edited to rough 


values, and then individual (1-2) inputs may be selected for 
fine adjustment. This method of working can save you a lot of 


time. 
chan: Here you may select the MIDI channel for the selected input. 
note: Here you may select the MIDI note number you wish to assign 
to the input 
trig: This sets the trigger sensitivity of the selected input and 


should be adjusted to match your playing style and also to the 
nature of the drum pad, mic or bug you are using. As you 
adjust the trigger level, this is represented in the box to the 


right. 
capture: This allows you to set the capture time of the selected input. 
recover: This allows you to set the recovery time of the selected input 


and should be set so that stick bounce doesn't cause 
unnecessary false triggering. 


on-time: This sets the length of the note that will be issued from the 
MES35T's MIDI output for that channel. In this way, drums can 
be used to trigger keyboard sounds. 


U-curve: Here you may select from 8 different velocity curves to match 
your playing style. Please see the ME35T manual for details of 
these curves. 


As you play your pads or drums, you will see something like the following display with 
a PPM style bargraph: 


unit: input: ALL 
chan: capture: 4mS 


note: recover: 10mS 

sens: on-time: 10mS 

trig: 25 VU-curve: $3 Ni- 

EDIT Darth : sac ea5 Fe 





For more information on these parameters, please refer to the ME35T's operators 
manual. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


136 UTILITY MODE 





The second page of the DRUM mode is accessed by pressing DEX: 


CRM UNIT Cont ROL 


operation: 
exclusive channel: 
MIDI thru enable: 


—a9a8 CONT 





This page allows you to set up MIDI parameters for up to two MES35T units. 
Parameters which you can set are: operation (ON or OFF), exclusive channels for 
programming (1-32) and enable of MIDI THRU operation (ON or OFF). To return to 
the first DRUM page, press Qi. You may exit the DRUM mode by pressing the 
UTILITY mode select key again - this will return you to the main UTILITY page. 


SMPTE PAGE 


Only the S3000 can use the SMPTE interface and because the S2800 software is a 
subset of the S3000 software, the key is shown here. You will be informed of this in 
the following HELP message screen display: 


GSR 8 ad Utilities and Options 

1s screen indicates which additional 
features are available on this machine. 
Use the relevant soft-key to select 


the feature you require. 
CSorrys SMPTE not available on S2800.] 


(oT) Os Eka 





lf you need to use SMPTE, then you will need to get hold of an S3000 


DIGITAL AUDIO INTERFACE 


REAL 


The third option in the UTILITY mode is the DAT BACKUP facility. This uses the 
IB-302D AES/EBU DIGITAL AUDIO INTERFACE. If this interface is not fitted, 
pressing [@&04 (F2) will display this message. 


CISITHL INTERFFHCE — Nat ¢1it-tedcd! 

To receive and transmit digital audio 
and to use the DAT backup facility, you 
will need to fit the digital interface 
card — please consult your dealer. 


(CONT) 





TIME DIGITAL OUTPUTS 


The IB-302D is always transmitting digital audio - this is a digital copy of the audio 
appearing at the LEFT/RIGHT stereo analogue outputs. This can be sent directly to 
other digital audio devices that can accept AES/EBU and SPDIF digital audio signals 
such as DAT, a digital multi-track recorder such as the Akai ADAM DR1200 (using the 
DIF1200) or Akai DD1000 Magneto Optical Disk recorder/editor. No special setup is 
required for this. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


UTILITY MODE 137 





DAT BACKUP 


One very useful function of the digital interface is that of DAT backup. This allows you 
to make safety copies of your data on a simple DAT tape. This can be invaluable for 
archiving a disk when it is full and helps you overcome the problem of lost data in the 
event of a problem occurring with your hard disk. To access the DAT BACKUP 
functions, press F2 - REDE. You will receive this screen display: 


CISITAL EAC) LF programs: 
current vol: NOT NAMED samples: 
complete vols: Qlists: 


backup type: HARD DISK FX: 
transmit: 44.1KHz DURES drum: 


DIGI (SAVE) (LOAD) 





Here you may set the parameters and perform a backup or restore. The fields are as 
follows: 


vol: This displays the name of the current volume selected in the 
DISK mode. When the backup or restore process is in 
operation, this field changes to show the name of the volume 
currently being backed up or restored. This field is not 
accessible to the user. 


complete vols: _ This field is also not accessible to the user and merely a 
progress display to show the number of volumes that have 
been backed up or restored in the process. 


transmit: The sampler's transmit rate is fixed at 44.1kKHz. And here you 
may select between the consumer format for digital audio 
(SPDIF) or the professional AES/EBU format when 
transferring digital audio to DAT or some other recording 
medium or when performing DAT backup. What you select 
depends very much on your equipment. Some equipment is 
very forgiving and doesn't mind either format. Other 
equipment, however, is not so flexible and you have to choose 
specifically which format to use. 


backup type: Here you may select to backup either your hard disk or just a 
single memory load of samples - i.e. those in RAM at the 
present time. Usually the selection is HARD DISK because you 
mostly want to use this facility to make safety copies of your 
hard disk however many people, especially those with memory 
expansion boards fitted in their sampler, use the back up 
facility to backup long samples from memory rather than tie up 
an expensive hard disk drive. 


PERFORMING A DAT BACK UP 


This is simple! Assuming you have made the necessary digital audio connections, simply 
press RECORD and PLAY on the DAT (ar whatever combination is required on your 
particular machine) and, ensuring that the DAT is actually recording, press - F7. 
The $2800 will backup to DAT. 


If you are saving volumes to DAT individually, 2 Meg will take about 30 seconds. If you 


are backing up the contents of your hard disk to DAT, each 2 Meg volume takes about 
100 seconds - this is due to certain SCSI control considerations. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


138 UTILITY MODE 





Data is saved in a digital audio format and but the sample headers and program 
information and other data are stored in a special format. During the save, both DAT 
channels are used but when restoring, only the left hand side is used. 


PERFORMING A DAT RESTORE 


This too is simple. Find the point on the DAT where your backup is, press LOAD) on 
the S2800 and PLAY on your DAT - the contents of the S2800's memory or hard 
disk will be restored. 


Please note that when performing a restore, it is not possible to do a partial restore - 
i.e. when restoring into memory, you cannot selectively select one snare drum, for 
example, and when restoring to hard disk, you cannot selectively choose a single 
volume. 


As backing up and restoration takes place, the number of samples, programs, Qlists 
and other items will be displayed on the screen. 


PLEASE NOTE 
THE DAT RESTORE PROCESS WILL ERASE THE CURRENT 
MEMORY CONTENTS OR HARD DISK DATA - PLEASE BE CAREFUL 


NOTE: Though digital tape streaming offers many advantages in terms of speed, 

convenience and cost of the media, Akai does not guarantee the integrity of the data 

backed up in this way. It is therefore strongly recommended that for archive purposes 
ou use floppy disks. 





Version 1.0 10/92 


UTILITY MODE 139 





INSTALLING THE OPTIONS 


IB-301S SCSI INTERFACE 


IB-302D DIGITAL AUDIO INTERFACE 





BASIC MEMORY BOARD 
MEMORY EXPANSION BOARD SLOTS 


TOP VIEW OF THE INSIDE OF THE S2800 


The above diagram shows the positioning of the various options and interfaces 
available for the S2800. They are quite easy to fit and fitting instructions are provided 
with the interfaces when you buy them. Please get an authorised Akai dealer to fit 
them. 


"Connection board set" is supplied with the S2800 for the purpose of installing the 
IB-301S or the IB-302D board. Please do not lose this set of parts. 

If you need to install either the IB-301S or the IB-302D in the S2800, contact either 
your local AKAI Professional dealer or an AKAI Authorized Service Center and bring 
both the S2800 and the "Connection board set" to have these parts installed. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


140 GLOSSARY 





GLOSSARY 


Every new technology invents its own terms to describe new techniques. Digital 
music is no exception, unfortunately. However, a glossary such as this can help 
introduce you to the vocabulary and concepts involved. We assume you have a basic 
knowledge of MIDI, but if the S2800 is your first excursion into MIDI and sampling, 
we suggest you get hold of an introductory MIDI book, and read it before proceeding 
much further with your S2800. 


ANALOGUE 


CROSSFADING 


CURSOR 


ENVELOPE 


FIELD 


FILTER 


HARMONICS 


KEY 


KEYGROUP 


Version 1.0 10/92 


As opposed to digital. Analogue electronics use continuously 
varying voltages whereas digital circuitry uses only ‘on’ and 
‘offs’. 


On the S2800, crossfading is the term used to describe the 
setting of the relative volume of two samples which are played 
at the same time. For instance velocity crossfading is used to 
describe the relative balance between two samples played by 
the same key, when the key is played at different velocities. 
Positional crossfading refers to relative balance between 
samples in different keyspans (see EDIT PROGRAM). 
Additionally, the S2800 allows loop crossfading - the ability to 
fade samples inside themselves to allow for smooth looping. 


On the S2800, the cursor is the highlighted (reversed) part of 
the display which is moved by the CURSOR keys and 
indicates the parameter which may be changed by the DATA 
control and/or the number keypad. 


The ‘shape’ of the sound - i.e. percusive, plucked, bowed, 
blown, et.. On a synthesizer or sampler, envelope generators 
allow you to ‘shape’ the amplitude and tonal dynamics of a 
sound. Typically, they allow you to emulate the attack, devay 
sustain and release characteristics of a note. 


On the S2800, a field is the portion of a page containing a 
parameter. Only fields (i.e. those portions of a page which 
may be altered) will be highlighted by the cursor as the 
CURSOR keys move you through a page. 


There are two meanings for this on the S2800. One is to 
remove harmonics out of a sound (see ‘harmonics'). The other 
is to only allow certain MIDI information to pass through the 
$2800. 


Overtones or extra frequencies in a sound that creates its 
tonal characteristics. A sound with many harmonics will be 
bright in tone whilst one with few harmonics will quite mellow. 
A trumpet, for example, has many harmonics whereas a flute 
has very few. We can manipulate a sound's harmonic content 
using filters. 


In this manual, the word ‘key’ will generally be used to refer to 
a push-button switch on the front panel. This should not be 
confused with the keys on a musical piano-type keyboard. 


The term for a collection of a number of parameters of up to 
four samples, their name, keyspan, filtering, envelopes, etc.. 


KEYSPAN 


LFO 


LOOPING 


MULTISAMPLING 


GLOSSARY 141 





On the S2800, a keyspan is the range of the keyboard on 
which a sample can be played. 


Low Frequency Oscillator - an oscillator which operates at too 
low a frequency to produce an audible tone, but is used to 
modulate such parameters as pitch, pan position, etc. The 
S2800 has a number of LFOs implemented in software. 


In sampling, looping refers to the process of taking a portion 
of a sample and repeating it. The S2800 allows four such 
loops to be present in a sample, allowing incredibly subtle 
variations on the basic sampled sound. 


When sampling a sound, replaying it at a radically higher or 
lower pitch will produce strange and unnatural effects. To 
overcome this problem, samples should be taken from across 
the pitch range of an instrument and assigned to different 
keyspans across the keyboard. This is known as 
multisampling. 


OPERATING SYSTEM Without a computer program to send signals through the maze 


OVERTONES 


PAGE 


PARAMETER 


POSITIONAL 
CROSSFADING 


PROGRAM 


REAL-TIME 


of chips and circuitry which make up the hardware of the 
$2800, the machine would be useless. The program which 
contains the instructions to respond to MIDI messages, 
buttons and controllers, and display messages, etc., on screen 
(as well as to record and play back sounds) is known as the 
operating system. This is automatically loaded when the 
$2800 is powered up, either from chips inside the S2800, or, 
if a disk containing a version of the operating system has been 
placed in the floppy disk drive, from disk. 


Basically the same as harmonics 


On the S2800, a page is the set of information and 
parameters shown at any one time on the display screen. 
Pages can be entered by pressing the named buttons (EDIT 
SAMPLE, EDIT PROGRAM, etc.), or the soft keys whose 
legends are displayed at the bottom of a page. 


A value which can be changed (for instance length, tuning, 
upper limit of a keyspan) as displayed on the screen of the 
$2800. 


See Crossfading. 


The term for a collection of kKeygroups which will all be selected 
together when the program is selected. Different programs 
can be assigned to different MIDI channels, so that when a 
sequencer is connected to the S2800, multi-timbral output is 
possible. 


As opposed to non real-time - the ability to actually hear the 
results of your editing without having to wait for the computer 
(or in this case, the S2800) to do calculations. It is very 
important for editing to be real-time for successful operation. 
Most functions on the S2800 are real-time except for such 
things as copying samples and timestretch. The length of time 


Version 1.0 10/92 


142 GLOSSARY 





SAMPLE 


SCSI 


SOFT KEY 


SPLICING 


VELOCITY 
CROSSFADING 


VELOCITY ZONES 


VOLUME 


Version 1.0 10/92 


it takes for these processes depends on the length of the 
sample. 


Usually in the manual, the word sample will refer to a sound 
which has been recorded, digitized and edited, and can then 
be added to a keygroup (you might like to think of it as a 
“waveform” in analogue synthesizer terms). However, when 
editing one of these sounds, the length and position inside 
this sample is also measured n samples. This latter meaning 
refers to the digitized ‘snapshot’ image of the sound for one 
cycle of the sampling process. A sample recorded at 44.1kHz 
and lasting for exactly one second therefore contains 44,100 
samples! It will usually be clear in this manual, however, what 
meaning of the word sample is meant at any one time - ff it is 
likely to cause confusion, we will refer it as a ‘recording’. 


Short for Small Computer Serial Interface and is a standard 
communication method between two computers or a computer 
(i.e the S2800) and a hard disk drive. 


On the S2800, a key underneath the LCD with no predefined 
function. The current state of the S2800 determines the 
function, which is displayed on the bottom line of the page. 


The process of joining samples to each other (analogous to 
tape splicing). However, this is much easier electronically than 
when using razor blades and splicing tape, and many more 
effects are possible. To take an extreme example, the sound 
of a string section could be spliced to the sound of a bottle 
breaking, and the resulting sample then spliced to the reversed 
sound of the string attack. 


See Crossfading and Velocity zones. 


On the S2800, a sample can be programmed to play only 
when a key is pressed between certain velocities. The range of 
these is known as a velocity zone. Up to four samples may be 
assigned in each keygroup, and if desired, each can be 
assigned to a different velocity zone. In this way, a finger- 
style electric bass sample could be assigned to lower velocity 
zones, and a slap or pull bass to higher ones, with a velocity 
crossfade added so that there is an intermediate range. The 
result, when played, will provide a highly expressive bass 
instrument. 


As well as being the output level from the S2800, volume has 
another meaning a collection of programs, samples and drum 
settings which can be stored together on a floppy disk, on a 
hard disk or in memory. One volume can be stored in memory 
or on each diskette, and up to 128 volumes can be stored on a 
hard disk. 


MIDI IMPLEMENTATI ON CHART 


143 





$2800 MIDI IMPLEMENTATION CHART 







Basic Default 
Channel Changed 1-16 
Default Mode 3 
Mode 1-4 


Mode OMNI ON/OFF, P/M 


X 


Messages 
Altered 








REKEKEKKKEKEE 






















X 21-127 
True Voice oe 4-127 
Velocity Note on © Qn V=1-127 
Note off X 8n V=1-127 


Pitchbend 


Control 
Change 








Program Change 
True No. 


System Exclusive 











System 
Common 


Song position 
Song select 
Tune 








Clock 
Commands 


System 
Realtime : 









Aux : Local ON/OFF X X 
Messages :__ All Notes OFF X © (123) 

: Active Sense X X 

Reset X X 


Mode 1 : OMNI ON, POLY 
Mode 3 : OMNI OFF, POLY 


Mode 2 : OMNI ON, MONO 
Mode 4 : OMNI OFF, MONO 


(1) Use external Modulation. 


Date : SEP.1992 


Remarks 





Without disk 


Memorized (disk) 


Without disk 
Memorized (disk) 


Release Velocity 


— --—— -- --———— 


0-24 semitone steps 
(8-bit resolution) 


Modulation wheel 

EWI Breath controller (*1) 
Foot switch controller (*1) 
Volume 

Sustain pedal 

Soft pedal 


by Preset number 
Value 

AKAI ID : 47H 
$2800 ID : 48H (*2) 


’ : Yes 
X : No 


(*2) Full details of System Exclusive data formats does not installed software Version 1.0. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


144. SPECIFICATIONS 





SPECIFICATIONS 


: MIDI Stereo Digital Sampler S2800 


: 16-bit linear encording 


Mode! Name 
Sampling Data format 


Sampling rates ° 44.1 KHz (20 Hz~20 KHz audio band width) 
22.05 KHz (20 Hz~10 KHz audio band width) 


- 22.28 seconds - mono Fs=44.1 KHz 


44.56 seconds - mono Fs=22.05 KHz 
11.14 seconds - stereo Fs=44.1 KHz 
22.28 seconds - stereo Fs=22.05 KHz 


: 2 Mbyte standard, expandable to 16 Mbyte 


Sampling time 


(unexpanded memory) 


Internal Memory 
Polyphony : 32 Voices 
Maximum number of Samples =: 255 
Maximum number of Programs : 254 


Filter : Digital moving low-pass filter (-12 dB/octave with resonant) 


Envelope generators 
FAD: 


: 2 x digital Envelope generators (1 multi-stage) 


: 2 x Low Frequency Oscillators 


Display : Backlit 320 characters/240 x 640 graphic LCD 
Diskette drive : 3.5" dual density drive (2HD, 2DD) 
Connectors 

REC IN : 2 x 1/4-inch phone (balanced) 

STEREO OUT : 2x 1/4-inch phone (unbalanced) 


ASSIGNABLE OUTS 


: 2 x 1/4-inch phone (unbalancedq) 


| 6.0 dBm. 600 Q 


HEADPHONES : 1 x 1/4-inch stereo phone 
FOOTSWITCH : 1 x 1/4-inch phone 
MIDI : 3 x DIN5P (IN, OUT, THRU) 

REC GAIN : HI-58 dBm, MID-38 dBm, LO-18 dBm 


Power Requirements 


- 120VAC 60Hz 36W _) for U.S.A and Canada 


220~230VAC 50Hz_ for Europe (excluding U.K.) 


240VAC 50 Hz _ for U.K. and Australia 

Demensions : 483W x 88.1H x 411 (*429) Dmm (EIA 2U size) 
(*) maximum 

Weight Lv. a 
Accessories : Ac power cable .................. 1 

Sound Library Disks .......... 4 

Connection Board set........ 1 

Operators Manual ............. 1 


Optional Accessories 


EXM 3002 : 2 Mbyte memory expansion board 
EXM 3008 : 8 Mbyte memory expansion board 
IB-301S : SCSI Interface 

IB-302D : AES/EBU digital interface 

BL1000 : 3.5 inch blank diskettes (MF2HD) 


* Above specifications are subject to change without prior notice. 


Version 1.0 10/92 


